mpmemHmHeRHmRHeHeHeHeHeHeHeHeHeHee es =| = 


UNIX DOCUMENTATION ROAD MAP 


| 


1485 UNIX 
B.1.1 
UNIX Documentation Road Map 
G. A. Snyder 
J. R. Mashey 


Bell Laboratories 
Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974 


1. INTRODUCTION 


A great deal of documentation exists for the UNIX time-sharing system. New users are often 
overcome by the volume and distributed nature of the documentation. This ‘“‘road map”’ 
attempts to be a terse, up-to-date outline of important documents and information sources. 


ta The information in this document applies only to UNIX Release 4.0. 
1.1 Things to Do 


See a local UNIX ‘‘system administrator’ to obtain a “‘login name’’ and get other appropriate 
system information. See also Section 12 below. 


1.2 Notation Used in This Road Map (B.1.1) ee 


{N}— Section N in this road map. 
ee — Item required for everyone. 
e@ -— Item recommended for most users. 


All other items are optional and depend on specific interests. If the name of a document men- 
tioned here is followed by a number such as ‘‘(A.1.1),”’ then that document can be found in 
Documents for UNIX. Examine Section G of the Annotated Table of Contents in that volume for 
additional sources of information. 


Entries in Section n of the UNIX User’s Manual are referred to by name(n). 


1.3 List of Following Sections ee 


} BASIC INFORMATION 
} BASIC TEXT PROCESSING AND DOCUMENT PREPARATION 
} SPECIALIZED TEXT PROCESSING 
} ADVANCED TEXT PROCESSING 
} COMMAND LANGUAGE (SHELL) PROGRAMMING 
} FILE MANIPULATION 
} C PROGRAMMING 

} NUMERICAL COMPUTATION 

} SOURCE CODE CONTROL SYSTEM 
} INTER-SYSTEM COMMUNICATION 
} LOCAL INFORMATION 


{4} {5} {8,10,11} 


+ UNIX is a trademark of Bell Laboratories. 


2 UNIX Documentation Road Map 


Each section contains a list of relevant documents and a list of pertinent manual entries; some 
sections also contain a list of suggested things to do. 


Only the manual entries for the most frequently used commands are listed here; other relevant 
entries may be found by consulting the Table of Contents and the Permuted Index of the UNIX 
User’s Manual {2.1}; it is also wise to periodically scan Section | of that manual—you will often 
discover new uses for commands. 

2. BASIC INFORMATION 


You won’t be able to do much until you have learned most of the material in {2.1}, {2.2}, and 
{2.3}. You must know how to log into the system, make your terminal work correctly, enter 
and edit files, and perform basic operations on directories and files. Get the UNIX Programming 
Starter Package from your local Computer Information Service Library. 


2.1 UNIX User’s Manual ee 


— Read /ntroduction and How to Get Started. 

— Read the intro entry in each section. 

— Look through Section | to become familiar with command names. 

— Get into the habit of using the Table of Contents and the Permuted Index. 


Section 1 will be especially needed for reference use. 

2.2 UNIX for Beginners (Second Edition) (B.3.1) ee 

2.3 A Tutorial Introduction to the UNIX Text Editor (B.2.1) e@ 

2.4 Advanced Editing on UNIX (B.2.2) @ 

2.5 The Bell System Technical Journal, Vol. 57, No. 6, Part 2 @ 

Contains several articles on UNIX. In particular, the first paper gives a good overview of UNIX. 
2.6 Things to Do 


— Do all the exercises found in {2.2} and {2.3}, and maybe {2.4}. 

— If you want some sequence of commands to be executed each time you log in, create a file 
named .profile in your login directory.! A sample .profile can be found in profile(5). 

— Files in directory /usr/news contain recent information on various topics. To print all the 
news items that have been added since you last looked, type: 


news 
2.7 Manual Entries 


The following commands are described in Section 1 of the UNIX User’s Manual and are used 
for creating, editing, moving (i.e., renaming), and removing files: 


cat(1) concatenate and print files (no pagination). 

cd(1) change working (current) directory. 

chmod(1) change the mode of a file. 

cp(1) copy (cp), move (mv) or link (/n) files. 

ed(1) edit a file. 

Is(1) list a directory; file names beginning with . are not listed unless the —a 
flag is used. 

mkdir(1) make a (new) directory. 


1. The directory you are in when you log into the system. 


A 


UNIX Documentation Road Map 3 
pr(1) print files (paginated listings). 
pwd(1) print working directory. 
rm(1) remove (delete) file(s); rmdir removes the named directories, which must 
be empty. 


The following help you communicate with other users, make proper use of different kinds of 
terminals, and print manual entries on-line: 


login(1) sign on. 

mail(1) send mail to other users or inspect mail from them. 

man(1) print entries of UNIX User’s Manual. 

mesg(1) permit or deny messages to your terminal. 

news(1) print news items: news —n prints a list of recent items. 

passwd(1) change your login password. 

stty(1) set terminal options; i.e., inform the system about the hardware characteris- 
tics of your terminal. 

tabs(1) set tab stops on your terminal. 

term(7) a list of commonly-used terminals. 

who(1) print list of currently logged-in users. 

write(1) communicate with another (logged-in) user. 


Several useful status commands also exist: 


date(1) print time and date. 
du(1) summarize disk usage. 
ps(1) report active process status. 


3. BASIC TEXT PROCESSING AND DOCUMENT PREPARATION 


You should read this section if you want to use existing text processing tools to write letters, 
memoranda, manuals, etc. Get the UNIX Text Editing and Phototypesetting Starter Package from 
your local Computer Information Service Library. 


3.1 MM—Memorandum Macros (C.2.1) e@ 


This is a reference manual that can be moderately heavy going for a beginner. Try out some of 
the examples and stick close to the default options. 


3.2 Typing Documents with MM (C.2.2) ee 

A handy fold-out. 

3.3 A TROFF Tutorial (C.1.1) @ 

An introduction to formatting text with the phototypesetter. 
3.4 NROFF/TROFF User’s Manual (C.1.2) 


Describes the text formatting language in great detail; look at the SUMMARY AND INDEX, but 
don’t try to digest the whole manual on first reading. 


3.5 Manual Entries 


mm(1) print a document using the memorandum macros. 

troff(1) typeset or format (nroff) text files; read this to become familiar with 
options. 

spell(1) identify possible spelling errors. 


To obtain some special functions (e.g., reverse paper motion, subscripts, superscripts), you 
must either indicate the terminal type to nroff or post-process nroff output through one of the 
following: 


4 UNIX Documentation Road Map 
col(1) process text for terminals lacking physical reverse vertical motion, such as 
the Texas Instruments 700 series, Model 43 TELETYPE®, etc. 
greek(1) handle special functions for many terminals, such as DASI 300, Tektronix 
4014, Diablo 1620, Hewlett-Packard 2645, etc. 
te(1) simulate phototypesetter output on a Tektronix 4014 terminal. 


4. SPECIALIZED TEXT PROCESSING 

The tools listed here are of a more specialized nature than those in {3}. 
4.1 TBL—A Program to Format Tables (C.3.1) @ 

Great help in formatting tabular data (see also ¢b/(1)). 

4.2 Typesetting Mathematics—User’s Guide (Second Edition) (C.3.2) @ 


Read this if you need to produce mathematical equations. It describes the use of the equation- 
setting command eqn(1). 


4.3 A Macro Package for View Graphs and Slides (C.2.3) 
Tells how to prepare typeset visuals. 

4.4 UNIX Graphics Overview (E.6.1) 

Describes the Graphics sub-system of UNIX. 

4.5 Manual Entries 


cw(1) use a special constant-width “‘example”’ font. 

diffmk(1) mark changes between versions of a file, using output of diff(1) to produce 
‘*revision bars’’ in the right margin. 

eqn(1) preprocessor for mathematical equations. 

eqnchar(7) special character definitions for egn(1). 

graphics(1G) get into the graphics sub-system. 

mmt(1) typeset documents, view graphs, and slides. 

tbl(1) preprocessor for tabular data. 


5. ADVANCED TEXT PROCESSING 


You should read this section if you need to design your own package of formatting macros or 
perform other actions beyond the capabilities of existing tools; {3} is a prerequisite, and fami- 
liarity with {4} is very helpful, as is an experienced advisor. 


5.1 NROFF/TROFF User’s Manual (C.1.2) ee 
Look at this in detail and try modifying the examples. Read A TROFF Tutorial {3.3}. 
5.2 Things to Do 


It is fairly easy to use the text formatters for simple purposes. A typical application is that of 
writing simple macros that print standard headings in order to eliminate repetitive keying of 
such headings. It is extremely difficult to set up general-purpose macro packages for use by 
large numbers of people. Don’t re-invent what you can borrow from an existing package (such 
as MM—see {3.1} and {3.2}). 


5.3 Manual Entries 
All entries mentioned in {3.5} and {4.5}. 


UNIX Documentation Road Map 5 


6. COMMAND LANGUAGE (SHELL) PROGRAMMING 


The shell provides a powerful programming language for combining existing commands. This 
section should be especially useful to those who want to automate manual procedures and build 
data bases. 


6.1 The UNIX Time-Sharing System (A.1.2) ee 
6.2 UNIX Shell Tutorial (B.4.1) ee 

6.3 An Introduction to the UNIX Shell (B.4.2) 
6.4 Things to Do 


If you want to create your own library of commands, for example /usr/gas/bin, set the PATH 
parameter in your .profile so that your own library is searched when a command is invoked. 
For example: 


PATH=:$HOME/bin:/bin:/usr/bin 
The HOME parameter is described in sh(1). 
6.5 Manual Entries 


Read sh(1) first; the following entries give further details on commands that are most fre- 
quently used within command language programs: 


echo(1) echo arguments (typically to terminal). 

env(1) set environment for command execution. 

expr(1) evaluate an algebraic expression; includes some string operations. 
line(1) read a line from the standard input. 

nohup(1) run a command immune to communications line hang-up. 

sh(1) shell (command interpreter and programming language). 

test(1) evaluate a logical expression. 


7. FILE MANIPULATION 


In addition to the basic commands of {2}, many UNIX commands exist to perform various 
kinds of file manipulation. Small data bases can often be managed quite simply by combining 
text processing {5}, shell programming {6}, and the commands listed below in {7.3}. 


7.1 SED—A Non-Interactive Text Editor (B.2.3) 
7.2 AWK—A Pattern Scanning and Processing Language (E.3.1) 
7.3 Manual Entries 


, 


The starred (*) items below are especially useful for dealing with ‘‘fielded data,’’ i.e., data 
where each line is a sequence of delimited fields. The following are used to search or edit files 
in a single pass: 


awk(1)* perform actions on lines matching specified patterns. 

grep(1) search a file for a pattern; more powerful and specialized versions include 
egrep and fgrep. 

sed(1)* stream editor. 

tr(1) transliterate (substitute or delete specified characters). 


_The following compare files in different ways: 


cmp(1) compare files (byte by byte). 
comm(1) print lines common to and/or different in two files. 
diff(1) differential file comparator (minimal editing for conversion). 


6 UNIX Documentation Road Map 


The following combine files and/or split them apart: 


ar(1) archiver and library maintainer. 

cpio(1) general file copying and archiving. 

cut(1)* cut out selected fields of each line of a file. 

join(1) join two relations specified by the lines of two files. 
paste(1)* merge lines from several files. 

split(1) split file into chunks of specified size. 


The following interrogate files and print information about them: 


file(1) determine file type (best guess). 
od(1) octal dump (and other kinds also). 
sum(1) sum and count blocks in a file. 
we(1) word (and line and character) count. 


Miscellaneous commands: 


find(1) search directory structure for specified kinds of files. 
sort(1)* sort or merge files. 

tail(1) print the last part of a file. 

tee(1) copy single input to several output files. 

uniq(1)* report repeated lines in a file, or obtain unique ones. 


8. C PROGRAMMING 
Try to use existing tools first, before writing C programs at all. 
8.1 The C Programming Language 


A book written by B. W. Kernighan and D. M. Ritchie; published by Prentice Hall (1978). It 
contains comprehensive text and includes a tutorial and a reference manual. Read the tutorial; 
try the examples. Check for updates to the reference manual {8.2} from time to time. 


8.2 The C Programming Language—Reference Manual (D.1.1) ee 
8.3 UNIX Programming (D.3.1) e 

8.4 A Guide to the C Library for UNIX Users (D.1.2) @ 

8.5 SDB—A Symbolic Debugger (D.5.1) 

8.6 YACC—Yet Another Compiler- Compiler (E.1.2) 

8.7 LEX—A Lexical Analyzer Generator (E.1.1) 

8.8 LINT, a C Program Checker (D.1.3) 

8.9 MAKE—A Program for Maintaining Computer Programs (D.4.1) 
8.10 An Augmented Version of MAKE (D.4.2) 

8.11 Things to Do 


Read {8.1} and do some of the exercises. A good way to become familiar with C is to look at 

the source code of existing programs, especially ones whose functions are well known to you. 

Much code can be found in directory /usr/sre. In particular, the directory cmd contains the 
source for most of the commands. Also, investigate directory /usr/include. 


8.12 Manual Entries 


ar(1) archive and library maintainer. 
‘ec(1) compile C programs. 
Id(1) link edit object files; you must know about some of its flags. 


UNIX Documentation Road Map 7 


lex(1) 
lint(1) 
lorder(1) 
make(1) 
nm(1) 
prof(1) 
ps(1) 
sdb(1) 
strip(1) 
time(1) 
yacc(1) 


generate lexical.analyzers. 

verify C programs. 

find ordering relation for an object library. 

automate program (re)generation procedures. 

print name (i.e., symbol) list. 

display profile data; used for program optimization. 
report active process status. 

debug C and F77 programs symbolically on the VAX 11/780. 
remove symbols and relocation bits from executable files. 
time a command. 

parser generator. 


9. NUMERICAL COMPUTATION 


9.1 DC—An Interactive Desk Calculator (E.5.2) 


9.2 BC—An Arbitrary Precision Desk-Calculator Language (E.5.1) 


9.3 AWK—A Pattern Scanning and Processing Language (E.3.1) 


9.4 A Portable FORTRAN 77 Compiler (D.2.1) 


9.5 RATFOR—A Preprocessor for a Rational FORTRAN (D.2.2) 


9.6 SDB—A Symbolic Debugger (D.5.1) 


9.7 Manual Entries 


awk(1) 
be(1) 
bs(1) 
dce(1) 
f77(1) 
ratfor(1) 
sdb(1) 


perform actions on lines matching specified patterns. 

an interactive language, acts as front end for dc(1). 

a compiler/interpreter for modest-sized programs. 

a desk calculator. 

a FORTRAN compiler. 

a rational FORTRAN dialect. 

debug C and F77 programs symbolically on the VAX 11/780. 


10. SOURCE CODE CONTROL SYSTEM 


10.1 Source Code Control System User’s Guide (E.4.1) 


10.2 Manual Entries 


admin(1) 
cdce(1) 
comb(1) 
delta(1) 
get(1) 
help(1) 
prs(1) 
rmdel(1) 
sact(1) 
scesdiff(1) 
unget(1) 
val(1) 
what(1) 


create and administer SCCS files. 

change the delta commentary of an SCCS file. 

combine deltas of an SCCS file. 

create a new version or delta of a file under SCCS control. 

get a particular version of an SCCS file, usually for editing. 

print helpful error messages and information about a command. 
print delta information of an SCCS file in a specified format. 
remove a delta. 

print current SCCS file editing activity. 

print the different lines between two deltas of an SCCS file. 
undo the version control mechanism created by a get for editing. 
validate an SCCS file. 

print out embedded information lines placed in a file by SCCS. 


8 UNIX Documentation Road Map 


11. INTER-SYSTEM COMMUNICATION 

11.1 A Dial-up Network of UNIX Systems (E.8.1) @ 
11.2 UNIX Remote Job Entry User’s Guide (E.7.1) @ 
11.3: Manual Entries 


The following commands (most of which are site-dependent) are useful in communicating with 
other systems: 


cu(1C) call another system. 
dpr(1C) print files off-line at a specified destination. 
fget(1C) retrieve files from the HONEYWELL 6000. 
| fsend(1C) send files to the HONEYWELL 6000. 
| geat(1C) send phototypesetter output to the HONEYWELL 6000. 
| send(1C) send files to an IBM host for execution using Remote Job Entry. 
uucp(1C) copy files from one UNIX system to another. 
uux(1C) execute command(s) on another UNIX system. 


12. LOCAL INFORMATION 


ta This section should be provided by each individual UNIX installation. 


January 1981 


