6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE 


2. ADMINISTRATIVE ADVICE (DEC) 


GENERAL 
The information contained in this section is relative to the following DEC processors: 
e Digital Equipment Corp. VAX-11/780, 11/750 
e Digital Equipment Corp. PDP-11. 


For administrative advice pertaining to the 3B20S Processor, refer to section “ADMINISTRATIVE ADVICE 
(3B208)”. 


ADMINISTRATOR’S ROAD MAP 


This section contains administrative advice based on the experience of many system administrators and 
their suggestions. Other reasonable aproaches may be taken to solve many of the problem areas described. Get- 
ting started as a UNIX system administrator is hard work. There are no real shortcuts to a working knowledge 
of the system. The system administrator will need time for reading, studying and hands-on experimenting. The 
system administrator should not go “live” with the system until he/she have had two weeks to learn the job 
and get the initial hardware quirks ironed out. 


Do not consign the “Setting up the UNIX System” section of this guide to oblivion after your initial system 
“gen”. In addition to information needed again whenever adding or changing equipment, the section contains 
valuable material about system tuning (buffers, clists, etc.) that appears nowhere else. 


The administrator should be familiar with a lot of the distributed documentation. The “Introduction”, and 
“How to Get Started” sections of the UNIX System User’s Manual as well as all of the sections of the UNIX 


System Administrator’s Manual should be studied. 


Throughout this section, each reference of the form name(1M) name(7), or name(8) refers to entries in 
the UNIX System Administrator’s Manual. All other references to entries of the form name(N) where “N” is 
a number (1 through 6) possibly followed by a letter, refer to entry name in Section N of the UNIX System 
User’s Manual. 


In these manuals, pay special attention to: acct(1M), checkall(1M), chmod(1), chown(1), config(1M), 
epio(1), date(1), decopy(1M), df(1M), don(1M), du(1), ed(1), env(1), errpt(1M), find(1), format(1M), fsck 
(1M), fuser(1M), kill(1), mail(1), mkdir(1), mkfs(1M), ncheck(1M), ps(1), rm(1), rmdir(1), shutdown 
(1M), stty(1), su(1), syne(1M), time(1), vef(1M), voleopy(1M), wall(1M), who(1), and write(1); acct(4); 
all of Section 7; and crash(8), 750o0ps(8), and 7800ps(8). 


CONFIGURATION GUIDELINES 


Minimum recommended configurations are shown in Table 2.A. The figures are approximations based on 
several system administrator’s experience. 


Page 13 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


TABLE 2.A 


HARDWARE CONFIGURATION SIMULTANEOUS USERS 


PDP-11/70; 768K-byte memory; 
RP06 (RP04, RP05) disks 
(2 or more drives) 


Above with 1M-byte memory and 
a disk drive (or fixed-head disk) 
set aside for the root file system 
VAX-11/780; 2M-byte memory; 
at least 3 RP06 or RM05 disks 


See the “Setting up the UNIX System” section for the list of supported hardware options. 


DISK FREE SPACE 


Making files is easy under the UNIX operating system. It has been said that the only standard thing about 
all UNIX systems is the message-of-the-day telling users to clean up their files. Administratively, both free disk 
blocks and free inodes (UNIX system talk for file headers) can be a problem. If the free inode count falls below 
100, the system spends most of its time rebuilding the free inode array. If a file system runs out of space, the 
system prints “no-space” messages and does little else. To avoid problems, the following start-of-day free counts 


should be maintained: & 


e The file system containing /tmp (temporary files): 


—16-user system: 1500 free kilobytes(KB). 
—4(-user system: 3000 free KB. 


e The file system containing /usr. 
—3000 to 6000 free KB depending on load. 
e Other user file systems: 


. —6 to 10 percent free depending on user habits 
(3000 KB minimum). 


This brings up an associated problem: how big should file systems be? The preference is to set aside space 
on each drive for a copy of root/swap and use the rest of the pack for a single file system. However, if you have 
user groups that fight over disk space, it may be better to split them up arbitrarily (i.e., divide a pack into more 
than one file system). 


Warning: If different disk drives are set up with differing cylinder partitions between file 
systems, it will eventually lead to an operational! blunder. 


A VERY FEW WORDS ABOUT SYSTEM TUNING 


As shipped, the UNIX system has no programs with the text-bit mode set [see chmod(1)]. The top contend- 
ers for the t-bit are nroff and followed (generally) by the larger phases of the C compiler (including the % 
assembler and loader). The t-bit is only meaningful with pure text programs [Id(1) options —i or —n]. Do not 
overdo it and keep t-bit programs in the root file system. 


Page 14 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


A file system reorganization (described below) can help throughput but at the expense of down time. If the 
reorganization is done when the users are all asleep, it can help. 


If normal shutdown and filesave procedures are used, the file system check program |fsck(1M), —S option] 
will help keep the disk free list in reasonable order. Try to keep disk drive usage balanced. If there are over 
20 users, the root file system (/bin, /tmp, /etc, and swap) deserves a drive of its own. If there is a noisy modem 
(poorly executed do-it-yourself null-modem) or a disconnected modem cable, the UNIX system will spend a lot 
of CPU time trying to get it logged in. A random check of systems uncovers a lot of this going on. 


WHY A SPARE DISK DRIVE IS NEEDED 


Without a spare disk drive, the system will be down when a drive is down. Also, without the spare drive, 
it is difficult to reorganize file systems or to save and restore user files. 


DISK PACKS 


Only fully ECC (Error Correcting Code) correctable disk packs should be bought. The pack should be tested; 
and if uncorrectable errors develop, recondition the pack or get rid of it. 


RP06 disk packs used with the UNIX system need not be totally error free but must be “flag-free”. The term 
flag-free means that there should be no unrecoverable ECC errors. Technically, proper ECC handling can re- 
cover from 11-bit error bursts. However, the length of bursts can grow as a pack ages. It is recommended that 
no pack that has more than 8-bit error bursts be accepted. 


For the PDP-11, in reading the formatter printout, ECC correctable errors are identified by the headings 
“DATA ERROR DURING WRITE CHECK.” Error-register values are printed below the message. The two reg- 
isters of interest are RPER1 and RPEC2. A RPER1 value of 1000000 indicates ECC (no other bits on). The 
RPEC2 register describes the bit span of the error. For example, RPEC2=003774 means that there was an unac- 
ceptable 9-bit (binary 0000011111111100) error burst; RPEC2=002400 is an acceptable 3-bit span 
(0000010100000000-there may be zero bits mixed in). If such acceptable errors account for all “unrecoverable” 
errors reported (and there are not too many of them), then you have a flag-free pack. 


For the VAX, even this scant information was not available, so a formatter has been written (it tells its 
tale in English); see format(1M). 


PROTECTING USER FILES 


Users, especially inexperienced ones, occasionally remove their own files. Open files are sometimes lost 
when the system crashes. Once in a great while, an entire file system will be destroyed (picture a disk controller 
that goes bad and writes when it should read). Here is a suggested file backup procedure: 


e Each day copy all user file systems to backup packs. Keep these packs 3 to 5 days before reusing them. 
e (Once a week copy each file system to tape. Keep weekly tapes for 8 weeks. 
e Keep bimonthly tapes “forever” (they should be recopied once a year). 


The most recent weekly tapes should be kept off premises. The other tapes should be in a fireproof safe if 
available and not too expensive. 


When the UNIX system goes down, active files can get scrambled. Your users will not want to start the day 


over every time the system fails. In addition to good backup, you-must have file system patching expertise avail- 
able (on-site or on-call). If the system is ever rebooted for general use without first checking the file systems, 


Page 15 


| 
ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


100 new files in just 3 days.) Study checkall(1M), fsck(1M) and crash(8) as well as the “File System Checking” 
section for more information. 


terrible things will happen. (Once this caused five duplicate entries on a file system free list—this ruined over ae 
UNIX FILE SYSTEM BACKUP PROGRAMS 
The following backup programs are distributed: & 


e Find/cpio: The UNIX system is distributed in epio format. The —epio option of the find command can 
be used for saving only those files that have changed or been created over a definite period. 


e Voleopy: Physical file system copying to disk or tape. For those with a spare drive, voleopy to disk 
provides convenient file restore and quick recovery from disk disasters. Tape voleopy provides good 
long-term backup because the file system can be read-in fairly quickly, mounted, and browsed over. Disk Be 


and tape voleopy are generally used together for short- and long-term backup. Note that a voleopy 
from a mounted file system may result in an inconsistent copy (files being written at the time can con- 
tain invalid data). 


Table 2.B below summarizes attributes of these programs. The file system size is 65,500 KB in all cases; times 
are in minutes; judgements are subjective. 


TABLE 2.B 


Sea eS FIND/CPIO VOLCOPY (DISK) | VOLCOPY (TAPE) 


Full dump time 
Incremental dump time 
Full restore time 
Incremental restore time 
Ease of restoring: 
one file i good 
a directory i good 
scattered files good 
full restore i very good 
Needs tape drive yes no 
Needs spare file system 
. (only when restoring) 
Needs spare disk drive 
(two CPUs can share) 
Maintains pack/tape labels 
Handles multireel tape 
512 KB per record 
Interactive 
(i.e., ties up console) 
May require separate 
I/D space 


* KB per record are cut to 22 without separate I/D space. 


Page 16 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


The spare disk drive is strongly recommended. The speed and convenience of voleopy are by no means the 
only advantage of a spare drive. It is strongly recommended that the administrator modify the /etc/filesave 
and /etc/checklist files to meet the operational needs and update the local operator’s manual accordingly. Re- 
member, the more the administrator automates and documents operational procedures the less downtime will 
be encountered. 


CONTROLLING DISK USAGE 


If the UNIX system is a success, disk space will soon become limited. During the long delay before more 
drives become available, usage should be controlled. Try to maintain the start-of-day counts recommended. 
Watch usage during the day by executing the df(1) command regularly. 


The du(1) command should be executed (after hours) regularly (e.g., daily), and the output kept in an acces- 
sible file for later comparison. In this way, users rapidly increasing their disk usage may be spotted. This can 
also be accomplished by running the accounting system’s acctdusg program |see acct(1M)] as shown in “The 
UNIX System Accounting” section. 


The find(1) command can be used to locate inactive (or large) files. For example: 
find / —mtime +90 —atime +90 —print >somefile 
records in somefile the names of files neither written nor accessed in the last 90 days. 


The administrator will also have to balance usage between file systems. To do this, user directories must 
be moved. Users should be taught to accept file system name changes (and to program around them—preferably 
ahead of time). The user’s login directory name (available in the shell variable HOME) should be utilized to 
minimize pathname dependencies. User groups with more extensive file system structures should set up a shell 
variable to refer to the file system name (e.g., F'S). 


The find(1) and epio(1) commands can be used to move user directories and to manipulate the file system 
tree. The following sequence is useful (it moves the directory trees userx and usery from file system filesys1 
to file system filesys2 where, presumably, more space is available): 


ed /filesys1 

find userx usery —print ! cpio —pdm /filesys2 

Make sure new copy is OK. 

Change userx and usery login directories 
in the /etc/passwd file. 

Notify userx and usery via mail(1) that 
they have been moved and that pathname 
dependencies in their .profile and shell 
procedures may need changed. See the 
discussion on $HOME above. 

rm —rf /filesysl/userx /filesysl/usery 


FR S] SR FH OSS SE FR OSS 


When moving more than one user in this way, keep users with common interests in the same file system (these 
users may have linked files) and move groups of users who may have linked files with a single epio command 
(otherwise, linked files will be unlinked and duplicated). 

REORGANIZING FILE SYSTEMS 


There is a new file system reorganization utility called deopy(1M). On an otherwise idle system, a reorga- 
nized file system has almost twice the I/O throughput of a randomly organized file system. This applies to file 


Page 17 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


copying, finds, fscks, etc. Deopy can take up to 2.5 hours to initially reorganize (copy) a large file system. Dur- 
ing reorganization, the system can be up, but the file system being copied must be unmounted. 


For those who can afford the operator time, root reorganization once a week (requires system reboot) and 
user file system reorganization once a month will improve system performance. Deopy is an interim step. 


KEEPING DIRECTORY FILES SMALL 


Directories larger than 5K bytes (320 entries) are very inefficient because of file system indirection. A UNIX 
system user once complained that it took the system ten minutes to complete the login process; it turned out 
that his login directory was 25K bytes long, and the login program spent that time fruitlessly looking for a non- 
existent .profile file. A large /usr/mail or /usr/spool/uucp directory can also really slow the system down. The 
following will ferret out such directories: 


find / —type d —size +10 —print a 


Removing files from directories does not make the directories get smaller (the empty directory entries are 
available for reuse). The following will “compact” /usr/mail (or any other directory): 


mv /usr/mail /usr/omail 
mkdir /usr/mail 

chmod 777 /usr/mail 

ed /usr/omail 

find . —print i cpio —plm ../mail 
cd... 

rm —rf omail 


ADMINISTRATIVE USE OF “CRON” 


The program cron(1M) is useful in the administration of the system; it can be used to: 
e Turn off the programs in directory /usr/games during prime time. 
e Run programs off-hours: 


—accounting; 

—file system administration; 

—long-running, user-written shell procedures. 
[using the su(1) command], for example: 
su—userx userx_shell arg ... 


WATCH OUT FOR FILES AND DIRECTORIES THAT GROW wv 
Most of the below files are restarted automatically by entries in /etc/re at system reboot. 
e Accounting files: 


e /etc/wtmp—login information; grows extremely fast with terminal line difficulties; use 
acctcon(1M) to determine the offending line(s). 


e /usr/adm/pacet—per process accounting records; gets big quickly; monitored automatically by 
ckpacct from cron(1M). 


e /usr/adm/cronlog—status log of commands executed by eron(1M); also watch this file for error 
messages from the programs being executed in /usr/lib/crontab. 


Page 18 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


2 e /usr/adm/errfile—hardware error logging info; also read login adm’s mail periodically. 
e /usr/adm/ctlog—a log of the people who use et(1C) command. 


e /usr/adm/sulog—a log of those who execute the superuser command. 


/usr/adm/Spacet—process accounting files left over from an accounting failure; remove these 
files unless the accounting files that failed are to be rerun. 


e Other files: 


e /usr/spool—spooling directory for line printers, uuep(1C), etc., and whose subdirectories 
te should be compacted as described above. 


ALLOCATING RESOURCES TO USERS 


A prospective user should first obtain authorization to use the system and then apply for a login by provid- 
ing the following information to the “system administrator”: 


e User’s name. 
e Suggested login name (not more than eight characters, beginning with a lowercase letter). 
e Relationships to other users (this influences the choice of the file system). 


G e Estimate of required file space (this also influences the choice of the file system) and connect hours. 
This aids in hardware growth planning. 


Users should be forced to have passwords not more than eight characters long, but more than five, and not 
in Webster’s Unabridged; passwd(4) explains how to do that as well as explaining password aging. 


THE MATTER OF ACCOUNTING AND USAGE 


You should run the accounting programs even if there is not a “bill” for service. Otherwise, users’ habits 
(especially bad habits) will be a mystery to you. Accounting information can also help you find performance 
bottlenecks, unused logins, bad phone lines, etc. 


@ DIAL-LINE UTILIZATION 


If prime-time dial-line utilization gets much over 70 percent, users will start to encounter busy signals when 
dialing in. This, in turn, will lead to “line hogging”. The only solutions are to acquire more dial-up ports, get 
a larger (another) machine, or to get rid of users. Manual policing will help some, but “automatic” policing will 
be invariably subverted by users. 


“BIRD-DOGGING” 


When the system is busy (lines busy and/or slow response), someone should determine why this is so. The 
who(1) command lists the people logged in. The ps(1) command shows what they are doing. Unfortunately, ps 
operates from heuristics that can consistently fail to report certain processes in a busy system. That is, one must 
be careful about hanging up an apparently inactive line. The acectecom(1M) command can read the process ac- 

& counting file /usr/adm/pacet backwards from the most recent entry. It will print entries for selected lines or 
login names. 


Page 19 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


300/1,200-BAUD TERMINALS 


Do not use uppercase only terminals. Use full-duplex, full-ASCII asynchronous terminals. Hardware hori- 
zontal tabbing is very desirable because it increases output speed and lowers system overhead. A fair proportion 
of the terminals should provide for correspondence quality hard copy output to take advantage of the UNIX sys- 
tem word processing capabilities; see term(5). 


LINE PRINTERS 


Most line printers are troublesome and impose considerable overhead on the system. Most also lack hard- 
ware tabs, character overstrike capability, etc. A printer that will work over an asynchronous link (DC1/DC3 
protocol required) is the best bet. 


SECURITY 


The current UNIX operating system is not tamperproof. The system administrator can not keep people from 
“breaking” the system but can usually detect that they have done so. The following command will mail (to root) 
a list of all “set user ID” programs owned by root (superuser): 


find / —user root ~perm —4100 —exee Is —| { } \;! mail root 
Any surprises in root’s mail should be investigated. Related advice: 


e Change the superuser password regularly. Do not pick obvious passwords (choose six-to-eight character 
nonsense strings that combine alphabetics with digits or special characters). 


e Dial ports that do not require passwords usually cause trouble. 
e The chroot(1M) and su(1) commands are inherently dangerous as are group passwords. 


e Login directories, .profile files, and files in /bin, /usr/bin, /Ibin, and /ete that are writable by others 
than their respective owners are security weak spots; police the system regularly against them. 


e Remember, no time-sharing system with dial ports is really secure. Do not keep top secret information 
on the system. 


COMMUNICATING WITH THE USERS 


The directory /usr/news and the news(1) command are provided as a way to get “brief” announcements 
to your users. More pressing items (one-liners) can be entered in the /etc/motd (message of the day) file; motd 
and (new to the user) news are announced at login time. 


To reach users who are already logged in, use the wall(1M) (write all) command. Do not use wall while 
logged-in as superuser, except in emergencies. 


The /usr/news directory should be cleaned out once a week by removing everything older than 2 months. 
It has been found that on most systems a file in /usr/news will reach 50 percent of the users within a day and 
over 80 percent within a week; motd should be cleaned out daily. 


TROUBLESHOOTING 


It would be easy to write a book on troubleshooting. The following is some effective advice in dealing with 
troubles. In dealing with hardware support service personnel: 


e Be sure that the contractor agrees to get along with the UNIX software before you take out a hardware 
service contract with DEC or with someone else (“It’s the hardware,” says you; “It’s the software,” says 
the hardware service contractor). 


Page 20 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE 


e Keep on top of problems. For instance, DEC has a problem-aging priority scheme. Find out about any 
such scheme that your contractor may have and make them prove that it is being followed. Remember 
that an unreported problem is getting no priority at all. If a problem persists, escalate it through the 
contractor’s local management chain; it may also be effective to complain to the contractor’s sales repre- 
sentative. 


e For effective service, an extended period support service offering (e.g., 16 hours/day, 6 days/week) 
should be provided. Arrange for preventive maintenance, noncritical repair, and add-on installation 
work to be done before or after prime time. 


e Know the details of the support service offering applicable to the installation. In particular, make sure 
that preventive maintenance is scheduled in advance and that it is completed. 


e A “site log” should be maintained for the hardware. All troubles should be recorded in the log by the 
support service personnel and/or the operating personnel. 


e Make sure that the hardware vendor (as well as the hardware service contractor, if the two are differ- 
ent) agrees to the presence of non-DEC equipment on your system (even if you have none to start with). 


e Run error logging and maintain console sheets. Make sure error messages are shown to support service 
personnel. 


e Take core dumps after system crashes and interpret results for support service personnel. 
e Keep records of downtime and make sure that support service personnel know about them. 


e After having considerable configuration trouble on the VAXs, a stand-alone utility vef was developed 
which tests for the presence of both MASSBUS* and UNIBUS* devices. The resulting list of addresses 
is compared with the operating system object module (/unix). Device address and interrupt vector dis- 
crepancies are reported. A complete configuration list can be generated as well. The vef should be run 
after any DEC service or any operating system software change. It can save days of downtime. 


Telephone problems are most apt to occur when rearranging or adding equipment. Occasionally, central of- 
fice, trunking, or modem failures occur. In dealing with the telephone services vendor: 


e Be specific with repair operators. Tell the operators that the trouble involves data equipment. 


e If the first call fails to get results, ask for the “supervisor” on the second call, and if necessary, escalate 
further to get the problem solved. 


Some of the obvious problem areas are: 


e Disk Drives—Over 50 percent of the problems are likely to be related to the disk subsystem. As men- 
tioned earlier, the way to keep the system up is to have a spare disk drive. Remember that preventive 
maintenance of disk drives is very important. Make sure that the support service personnel who service 
the hardware see the error-logging printouts and console error messages produced by the UNIX system 
(and that they understand them). Disk failure can ruin a UNIX file system. The only defense is to make 
a complete, daily file backup! (See “Protecting User Files”.) 


e Dial Ports—In this area, as well as in the area of synchronous data interfaces, there is room for finger- 
pointing among all vendors. Check for obvious things such as: 


—Is the system in “multiuser” mode? 
—Is the /etc/inittab file OK? 


* Trademark of Digital Equipment Corporation 


Page 21 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


—Are any cables loose (both ends)? 

—In some telephone offices, trunk hunting is 
based on 10-number groups. Hunting between 
such groups can fail independently of any- 
thing else. 


The possibilities for trouble are many. The “decision table” (Table 2.C) attempts to describe some alterna- 
tives; it is meant primarily for users of DH11/DZ11 asynchronous devices. If you are unfamiliar with the for- 
mat, (vertical) Rule 3 reads: “If line rings and ring light shows and computer does not answer and switching 
the modem solves the problem, then it is likely to be a telephone company problem; also, busy out that line.” 


e Early experience with the DZ11 has been poor. Several different problems have cropped up including 
bad line units and a stuck interrupt bit that crashes the system. Do not install DZs without giving them 


the full diagnostic treatment. eS 


e Synchronous Ports—High-speed synchronous interface devices are even more trouble than dial equip- 
ment. The following is a list of potential trouble spots: 


—The UNIX system software. 
—Interface device (e.g., KMC11B). 
—Cable to the modem. 

—The modem. 

—The communications line. 
—Other modem. 


—Other cable. 
—Other interface device. 
—Other system’s software. &y 


Think of the finger-pointing possibilities. The best defense is a good line monitor. 


e Power Supply Modules—There are a lot of them, and they do fail, more or less regularly. Hard failure 
can be detected at the console; voltage drift is tougher. Failure of the FP11 (floating-point unit) power 
supply (on PDP-11) can be slow to fix because service personnel are likely to work back from the far 
end of the “bus” taking a long time to find the problem. 


Page 22 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


TABLE 2.C 


ASYNCHRONOUS LINE PROBLEMS 


a Condition: 
Line rings 


Ring light shows on telephone console 
Computer answers 

Login message received on terminal 
Switching modem solves problem 


User can login 
ao Telephone console shows data received 
Problem affects whole DH/DZ (up to 16 lines) 


We a ee 
Aa ne 
KZ I KK 
Ail ted 
l2aml KK KK 
a 


Diagnosis and/or Action: 


No problem 

Hardware problem likely 

Telephone problem likely 

May be a problem with user’s terminal 
Busy out bad line(s) 


& DATA SET OPTIONS 


The following data set options seem to work with the UNIX system: 


The 801C-L1 (Auto-Call Unit): 
Jumpers: 
E2to E3 
E6 to Kd 


Options: 
YoX Tas 
ZG, ZP;.G, 


@ Hee 


Switches (0 = open, 1 = closed, i.e., side next to number is down): 
S1=1000[1] (Bracketed switches are missing on some models.) 


o S$2= 0101 
S3 = 11010 
$4 = 11[00] 
& The 212A-L1 (1200-baud full duplex): 
Options: 
Eve YE XC. 
YG, YJ, YK, 


S, V, A, T, ZH, 


& W, YP, YR 


Page 23 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


Switches: 
S1 = [0]001 
S2 = 110001000 
S3 = 11110000 (10100000 on 212A R-L1) 
o5 = 


NULL MODEM WIRING 


Improperly wired null modems can cause spurious interrupts, especially at higher baud rates. A single bad 
modem on a 9600-baud line can waste 15 percent of your CPU power. The following (symmetrical) wiring plan 
will prevent such problems: 


Pin 1 tol 

pin 2 to 3 

pin 3 to 2 

strap pin 4 to 5 in the same plug 
pin 6 to 20 

pin 7 to 7 

pin 8 to 20 

pin 20 to 6 and 8 

ground unused pins. 


113D, 103) DATA SET PROBLEMS 


The DH11 and DJ11 multiplexers normally have a jumper connecting pin 25 to pin 4 (request to send), thus 
asserting pin 25 when the line is opened. This jumper should be removed for any lines connected to 113Ds or 
103Js (also applies to 108Js with 801s). 


A FEW WORDS ABOUT ACU WIRING 

In rack-mounted 801/212s, cabling is fairly simple: a DN11 cable is plugged into an 801 (the rack provides 
the connection from the leftmost 801 to the leftmost 212) and the RS232 asynchronous interface device cable 
goes to the 212. 

Synchronous ports are generally not rack-mounted. For example, a 201C data set connected to KMC11/ 
DMC11 VPM link. The DMC cable goes to the “userint” (rightmost) 201C connection, the DN cable goes to the 
rear leftmost plug of the 801, the 801 to 201 connection goes from the 801 right plug to the 201 left plug. 

The cable to the 801 is supplied with the DN11. There is a conversion stubby cable at the ACU which connects 
to the DN cable. The cable from the ACU to the data set should be supplied with the 801 if the units are separate. 
Refer to the tab section “AUTO CALL FACILITY INSTALLATION” for more information. 

KMC11-B PROBLEMS 


If you receive a KMC11B that passes DEC diagnostics but does not work, check to see if it is “Rev Level 
E”. Most of the KMCs with that revision come with the wrong clock rate. 


Many system administrators have had problems with lengthy KMC downtime. Don’t stand for it! Make your 
computer service vendor keep bringing spares until you get a working unit. Escalate the problem! 


PHOTOTYPESETTING EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 


This part contains information on phototypesetting equipment and supplies for users of the UNIX system 
phototypesetting software. The information in this part applies only to the Wang Graphics Systems. 


Page 24 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


A. Phototypesetter 
The phototypesetter and fonts supported by the UNIX system are manufactured by: 


Wang Graphic Systems, Inc. 
Executive Drive 
Hudson, NH 03051 (603-889-8550) 


The phototypesetter is an on-line C/A/T System 1 with a high-speed turret. The external paper tape reader 
on the typesetter is not needed because the typesetter is connected to the PDP-11 CPU via a DRIIC. 


B. PDP-11/45 Only 


The following modification (developed by DEC Field Service) should be made to the DR11C (without this 
modification, the system may crash when the typesetter is powered down): “Add two 390-ohm resistors from 
E-18 pin 6 to ground, and from E-18 pin 3 to ground. Put a piece of insulating tubing over the leads so that they 
do not short out the ‘etch’ runs that they cross.” 


C. Fonts 


There are eight fonts that are normally used (see Table 2.D). The first three of the these provide the most 
often used (serif) typeface. The last three are used when a sans-serif typeface is desired. The fourth font contains 
a number of Greek characters and mathematical symbols. The fifth font is useful for typesetting text that you 
wish to look like terminal or printer output, e.g., examples of programs. Wang Graphic Systems, Inc. offers a 
variety of other fonts. For troff to be able to use these fonts, corresponding font tables must be built and com- 
piled into the directory /usr/lib/font. 


TABLE 2.D 


BT Times Roman 802-016A 
Times Italic 802-018A 
Times Bold 802-014A 


BT PI Font #4 Special Characters 829-021B 

BT PI Font #6 Constant Width 829-046A 

Helvetica (Geneva) Regular 803-032B G or H 
Helvetica (Geneva) Regular Italic 803-033B GI or HI 
Helvetica (Geneva) Medium 803-034B GM or HM 


Table 2.E shows other fonts for which the source font tables are supplied. 


Page 25 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


TABLE 2.E 


Boston Condensed 

News Condensed 

Century Schoolbook Expanded 
Century Schoolbook Italic 
Century Bold Italic 

Century Schoolbook 

Futura (Utica) Demibold 


Text Greek 

Helvetica (Geneva) Light 
Helvetica (Geneva) Light Italic 
Palatino 

Palatino Bold 

Palatino Italic 

Stymie Bold 

Stymie Medium Italic 

Stymie Medium 


D. Paper and Chemicals 


The phototypesetter “prints” onto photomechanical paper (obtained from a photographic supply house) and 


is specified as: ey 


e Kodak Ektamatic Paper, Grade S, Type 2250, 8 in.x150 ft., Spee. 175 (or equivalent). 
Also obtainable from such a supply house are the chemicals for the developing process: 
e Kodak Ektamatic A10 Activator (or equivalent). 
e Kodak Ektamatic 540 Stabilizer (or equivalent). 
These chemicals should be ordered in 9.5-liter (2.5-gallon) containers for the circulator. 


E. Developer 


A Kodak Ektamatic Processor Model 214K (or equivalent) is used to process the paper from the typesetter. & 
A lightproof box attached to the 214K (to hold the output cassette from the typesetter) is called an “Autofeeder” 
and can be obtained from: 


Peripheral Graphics, Inc. 

Andover Industrial Center 

York Street 

Andover, MA 01810 (617-475-9005). & 


Page 26 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


F. Circulator and Dryer 
ee A circulator and a paper dryer as well as a shelf for the dryer can be obtained from: 


Mohr Enterprises 
8015 North Ridgeway Ave. 
& Skokie, IL 60076 (312-674-8890). 


The needed parts are: 


e ME-8 Mohrflow: circulator to increase the usability of the chemicals. 


e ME-5 Mohrdry: dryer for the photomechanical paper. 


ed e Dryer Extension: shelf to support the dryer; it connects to the circulator cabinet. 


Also obtainable from Mohr Enterprises are cleaners for the developer and circulator. Such cleaning is 


needed every 2 to 4 weeks depending on the volume of work: 
e R-53 Mohrchem Activator Cleaner Concentrate. 


e R-57 Mohrchem Stabilizer Cleaner Concentrate. 


Each quart bottle makes 9.5 liters (2.5 gallons) of reusable cleaner to clean the tubing, rollers, and tray of the 
developer and circulator. Equivalent cleaners can also be obtained elsewhere. 


Page 27 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


NOTES 


Page 28 


