A TUTORIAL INTRODUCTION TO 
THE UNIX TEXT EDITOR 


1000 UNIX 
B.2.1 


A Tutorial Introduction to the UNIX Text Editor 


Brian W. Kernighan 


Bell Laboratories 
Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974 


ABSTRACT 


Almost all text input on the UNIX? operating system is done with the text-editor ed. 
This memorandum is a tutorial guide to help beginners get started with text editing. 


Although it does not cover everything, it does discuss enough for most users’ day- 
to-day needs. This includes printing, appending, changing, deleting, moving and insert- 
ing entire lines of text; reading and writing files; context searching and line addressing; 
the substitute command; the global commands; and the use of special characters for 


advanced editing. 


Introduction 


Ed is a ‘‘text editor’’, that is, an interactive 
program for creating and modifying ‘“‘text’’, 
using directions provided by a user at a terminal. 
The text is often a document like this one, or a 
program or perhaps data for a program. 


This introduction is meant to simplify learn- 
ing ed. The recommended way to learn ed is to 
read this document, simultaneously using ed to 
follow the examples, then to read the description 
in Section 1 of the UNIX User’s Manual, all the 
while experimenting with ed. (Solicitation of 
advice from experienced users is also useful.) 


Do the exercises! They cover material not 
completely discussed in the actual text. An 
appendix summarizes the commands. 


Disclaimer 


This is an introduction and a tutorial. For 
this reason, no attempt is made to cover more 
than a part of the facilities that ed offers 
(although this fraction includes the most useful 
and frequently used parts). When you have 
mastered the Tutorial, try Advanced Editing on 
UNIX. Also, there is not enough space to explain 
basic UNIX procedures. We will assume that you 


‘know how to log on to UNIX, and that you have 


at least a vague understanding of what a file is. 
For more on that, read UNIX for Beginners. 


+ UNIX is a trademark of Bell Laboratories. 


You must also know what character to type 
as the end-of-line on your particular terminal. 
This character is the RETURN key on most ter- 
minals. Throughout, we will refer to this charac- 
ter, whatever it is, as RETURN. 


Getting Started 


We'll assume that you have logged in to your 
system and it has just printed the prompt charac- 
ter, usually either a $ or a %. The easiest way to 
get ed is to type 


ed (followed by a return) 


You are now ready to go — ed is waiting for you 
to tell it what to do. 


Creating Text — The Append Command ‘‘a’”’ 


As your first problem, suppose you want to 
create some text starting from scratch. Perhaps 
you are typing the very first draft of a paper; 
clearly it will have to start somewhere, and 
undergo modifications later. This section will 
show how to get some text in, just to get started. 
Later we'll talk about how to change it. 


When ed is first started, it is rather like work- 
ing with a blank piece of paper — there is no 
text or information present. This must be sup- 
plied by the person using ed; it is usually done 
by typing in the text, or by reading it into ed 
from a file. We will start by typing in some text, 
and return shortly to how to read files. 


First a bit of terminology. In ed jargon, the 
text being worked on is said to be ‘‘kept in a 
buffer.’’ Think of the buffer as a work space, if 
you like, or simply as the information that you 
are going to be editing. In effect the buffer is 
like the piece of paper, on which we will write 
things, then change some of them, and finally 
file the whole thing away for another day. 


The user tells ed what to do to his text by 
typing instructions called ‘‘commands.’’ Most 
commands consist of a single letter, which must 
be typed in lower case. Each command is typed 
on a separate line. (Sometimes the command is 
preceded by information about what line or lines 
of text are to be affected — we will discuss these 
shortly.) Ed makes no response to most com- 
mands — there is no prompting or typing of 
messages like ‘‘ready’’. (This silence is preferred 
by experienced users, but sometimes a hangup 
for beginners.) 


The first command is append, written as the 
letter 


a 


all by itself. It means ‘‘append (or add) text 
lines to the buffer, as | type them in.’’ Append- 
ing is rather like writing fresh material on a piece 
of paper. 

So to enter lines of text into the buffer, just 
type an a followed by a RETURN, followed by 
the lines of text you want, like this: 


a 
Now is the time 
for all good men 
to come to the aid of their party. 


The only way to stop appending is to type a 
line that contains only a period. The “*.’’ is used 
to tell ed that you have finished appending. 
(Even experienced users forget that terminating 
“*."* sometimes. If ed seems to be ignoring you, 
type an extra line with just “*.’’ on it. You may 
then find you’ve added some garbage lines to 
your text, which you'll have to take out later.) 


After the append command has been done, 
the buffer will contain the three lines 


Now is the time 
for all good men 
to come to the aid of their party. 


The ‘‘a”’ and ‘‘.”’ aren’t there, because they are 
not text. 


To add more text to what you already have, 
just issue another a command, and continue typ- 


ing: 


Editor Tutorial 


Error Messages — ‘‘?”’ 


If at any time you make an error in the com- 
mands you type to ed, it will tell you by typing 


? 


This is about as cryptic as it can be, but with 
practice, you can usually figure out how you 
goofed. In some versions of ed, you can get a 
brief explanation of the error by typing 


h 


Writing Text out as a File — The Write Com- 
mand ‘‘w”’ 


It’s likely that you'll want to save your text 
for later use. To write out the contents of the 
buffer onto a file, use the write command 


w 


followed by the file name you want to write on. 
This will copy the buffer’s contents onto the 
specified file (destroying any previous informa- 
tion on the file). To save the text on a file 
named junk, for example, type 


w junk 


Leave a space between w and the file name. Ed 
will respond by printing the number of characters 
it wrote out. In this case, ed would respond with 


68 


(Remember that blanks and the return character 
at the end of each line are included in the char- 
acter count.) Writing a file just makes a copy of 
the text — the buffer’s contents are not dis- 
turbed, so you can go on adding lines to it. This 
is an important point. Ed at all times works ona 
copy of a file, not the file itself. No change in 
the contents of a file takes place until you give a 
w command. (Writing out the text onto a file 
from time to time as it is being created is a good 
idea, since if the system crashes or if you make 
some horrible mistake, you will lose all the text 
in the buffer but any text that was written onto a 
file is relatively safe.) 


Leaving ed — The Quit Command “‘q’’ 


To terminate a session with ed, first save 
your text by writing it onto a file using the w 
command, and then type the quit command 


q 


The system will respond with the prompt charac- 
ter ($ or %). At this point your buffer vanishes, 
with all its text, which is why you want to write it 
out before quitting.* 


* Actually, ed will print ? if you try to quit without 
writing. At that point, write if you want; if not, another q 
will get you out regardless. 


Editor Tutorial 


Exercise I: 


Enter ed and create some text using 


a 
Sarat 38 eae 


Write it out using w. Then leave ed with the q 
command, and print the file, to see that every- 
thing worked. (To print a file, say 


pr file_name 
or 
cat file_name 


in response to the prompt character. Try both.) 


Reading Text From a File — The Edit Com- 
mand ‘‘e”’ 


A common way to get text into the buffer is 
to read it from a file in the file system. This is 
what you do to edit text that you saved with the 
w command in a previous session. The edit 
command e fetches the entire contents of a file 
into the buffer. So if you had saved the three 
lines ‘‘Now is the time’’, etc., with a w com- 
mand in an earlier session, the ed command 


e junk 


would fetch the entire contents of the file junk 
into the buffer, and respond 


68 


which is the number of characters in junk. [f 
anything was already in the buffer, it is deleted first. 


If you use the e command to read a file into 
the buffer, then you need not use a file name 
after a subsequent w command; ed remembers 
the last file name used in an e command, and w 
will write on this file. Thus a good way to 
operate is 


ed 

e file 

[editing session] 
Ww 

q 


This way, you can simply say w from time to 
time, and be secure in the knowledge that if you 
got the file name right at the beginning, you are 
writing into the proper file each time. 


You can find out at any time what file name 
ed is remembering by typing the file command f. 


‘In this example, if you typed 


f 
ed would reply 
junk 


Reading Text From a File — The Read Com- 
mand ‘‘r’’ 


Sometimes you want to read a file into the 
buffer without destroying anything that is already 
there. This is done by the read command r. 
The command 


r junk 


will read the file junk into the buffer; it adds it 
to the end of whatever is already in the buffer. 
So if you do a read after an edit: 


e junk 
r junk 


the buffer will contain two copies of the text (six 
lines). 


Now is the time 
for all good men 
to come to the aid of their party. 
Now is the time 
for all good men 
to come to the aid of their party. 


Like the w and e commands, r prints the number 
of characters read in, after the reading operation 
is complete. 

Generally speaking, r is much less used than 
e. 


Exercise 2: 


Experiment with the e command — try read- 
ing and printing various files. You may get an 
error ?name, where name is the name of a file; 
this means that the file doesn’t exist, typically 
because you spelled the file name wrong, or 
perhaps that you are not allowed to read or write 
it. Try alternately reading and appending to sce 
that they work similarly. Verify that 


ed file_name 
is exactly equivalent to 
ed 
e file_name 
What does 
f file_name 
do? 
Printing the Contents of the Buffer — The 
Print Command ‘‘p”’ 


To print or list the contents of the buffer (or 
parts of it) on the terminal, use the print com- 
mand 


P 


The way this is done is as follows. Specify the 
lines where you want printing to begin and where 


you want it to end, separated by a comma, and 
followed by the letter p. Thus to print the first 
two lines of the buffer, for example, (that is, 
lines 1 through 2) say 

1,2p (starting line=1, ending line=2 p) 
Ed will respond with 


Now is the time 
for all good men 


Suppose you want to print a@// the lines in the 
buffer. You could use 1,3p as above if you knew 
there were exactly 3 lines in the buffer. But in 
general, you don’t know how many there are, so 
what do you use for the ending line number? 
Ed provides a shorthand symbol for “‘line 
number of last line in buffer’? — the dollar sign 
$. Use it this way: 

1,$p 


This will print al] the lines in the buffer (line 1 
to last line); 1,$p can be abbreviated ,p. If you 
want to stop the printing before it is finished, 
push the DEL or Delete key; ed will type 


> 
and wait for the next command. 
To print the Jast line of the buffer, you could 

use 

$,5p 
but ed lets you abbreviate this to 

Sp 
You can print any single line by typing the line 
number followed by a p. Thus 

Ip 
produces the response 

Now is the time 
which is the first line of the buffer. 


In fact, ed lets you abbreviate even further: 
you can print any single line by typing just the 
line number — no need to type the letter p. So 
if you say 


$ 
ed will print the last line of the buffer. 
You can also use $ in combinations like 
$—1,$p 


which prints the last two lines of the buffer. 
This helps when you want to see how far you got 


in typing. 


Editor Tutorial 


Exercise 3: 


As before, create some text using the a com- 
mand and experiment with the p command. You 
will find, for example, that you can’t print line 0 
or a line beyond the end of the buffer, and that 
attempts to print a buffer in reverse order by say- 
ing 

3,1p 


don’t work. 


The Current Line — ‘*Dot’’ or ‘*.”’ 


Suppose your buffer still contains the six 
lines as above, that you have just typed 


1,3p 
and ed has printed the three lines for you. Try 
typing just 

i) (no line numbers) 
This will print 

to come to the aid of their party. 


which is the third line of the buffer. In fact it is 
the last (most recent) line that you have done 
anything with. (You just printed it!) You can 
repeat this p command without line numbers, 
and it will continue to print line 3. 


The reason is that ed maintains a record of 
the last line that you did anything to (in this 
case, line 3, which you just printed) so that it 
can be used instead of an explicit line number. 
This most recent line is referred to by the short- 
hand symbol 


(pronounced “‘dot’’). 


Dot is a line number in the same way that $ is; it 
means exactly “‘the current line’’, or loosely, 
“the line you most recently did something to.”’ 
You can use it in several ways — one possibility 
is to say 


5p 


This will print all the lines from (including) the 
current line to the end of the buffer. In our 
example these are lines 3 through 6. 


Some commands change the value of dot, 
while others do not. The p command sets dot to 
the number of the last line printed; the last com- 
mand will set both . and §$ to 6. 


Dot is most useful when used in combina- 
tions like this one: 


| (or equivalently, .+1p) 


‘ 


This means “‘print the next line’ and is a handy 
way to step slowly through a buffer. You can 
also say 


Editor Tutorial 


Gieert | (or .—Ip ) 


which means ‘“‘print the line before the current 
line.”’ This enables you to go backwards if you 
wish. Another useful one is something like 


35. ap 
which prints the previous three lines. 


Don’t forget that all of these change the 
value of dot. You can find out what dot is at any 
time by typing 


Ed will respond by printing the value of dot. 


Let’s summarize some things about the p 
command and dot. Essentially p can be preceded 
by 0, 1, or 2 line numbers. If there is no line 
number given, it prints the “‘current line’, the 
line that dot refers to. If there is one line 
number given (with or without the letter p), it 
prints that line (and dot is set there); and if 
there are two line numbers, it prints all the lines 
in that range (and sets dot to the last line 
printed.) If two line numbers are specified the 
first can’t be bigger than the second (see Exer- 
cise 2.) 

Typing a single return will cause printing of 
the next line — it’s equivalent to .+Ip. Try it, 
Try typing a —; you will find that it’s equivalent 
to .—Ip. 


Deleting Lines — The Delete Command ‘‘d”’ 


Suppose you want to get rid of the three 
extra lines in the buffer. This is done by the 
delete command 


d 


Except that d deletes lines instead of printing 
them, its action is similar to that of p. The lines 
to be deleted are specified for d exactly as they 
are for p: 


starting line, ending line d 
Thus the command 
4,$d 


deletes lines 4 through the end. There are now 
three lines left, as you can check by using 


1,$p 


And notice that $ now is line 3! Dot is set to the 
next line after the last line deleted, unless the 


‘last line deleted is the last line in the buffer. In 


that case, dot is set to §. 


Exercise 4: 


Experiment with a, e, r, w, p and d until you 
are sure that you know what they do, and until 
you understand how dot, $, and line numbers 
are used. 


If you are adventurous, try using line 
numbers with a, r and w as well. You will find 
that a will append lines after the line number 
that you specify (rather than after dot); that r 
reads a file in after the line number you specify 
(not necessarily at the end of the buffer); and 
that w will write out exactly the lines you specify, 
not necessarily the whole buffer. These varia- 
tions are sometimes handy. For instance you 
can insert a file at the beginning of a buffer by 
saying 


Or file_name 
and you can enter lines at the beginning of the 
buffer by saying 


0a 
poe pare 


Notice that .w is very different from 


Modifying Text — The Substitute Command 


66a 
s 


We are now ready to try one of the most 
important of all commands — the substitute 
command 


s 


This is the command that is used to change indi- 
vidual words or letters within a line or group of 
lines. It is what you use, for example, for 
correcting spelling mistakes and typing errors. 


Suppose that, because of a typing error, line 
1 says 
Now is th time 


namely, the e has been left off the the. You can 
use s to fix this up as follows: 


1s/th/the/ 


This says: ‘‘in line 1, substitute for the characters 
th the characters the.”’ To verify that it works (ed 
will not print the result automatically) say 


P 
and get 
Now is the time 


which is what you wanted. Notice that dot must 
have been set to the line where the substitution 


took place, since the p command printed that 
line. Dot is always set this way with the s com- 
mand. 


The general way to use the substitute com- 
mand is 


starting-line, ending-line s/change this/to this/ 


Whatever string of characters is between the first 
pair of slashes is replaced by whatever is between 
the second pair, in all the lines between starting- 
line and ending-line. Only the first occurrence on 
each line is changed, however. If you want to 
change every occurrence, see Exercise 5. The 
rules for line numbers are the same as those for 
p, except that dot is set to the last line changed. 
(But there is a trap for the unwary: if no substi- 
tution took place, dot is mot changed. This 
causes an error ? as a warning.) 
Thus you can say 
1,$s/speling/spelling/ 


and correct the first spelling mistake on each line 
in the text. (This is useful for people who are 
consistent misspellers!) 


If no line numbers are given, the s command 
assumes we mean “‘make the substitution on line 
dot’’, so it changes things only on the current 
line. This leads to the very common sequence 


s/something/something else/p 


which makes some correction on the current 
line, and then prints it, to make sure it worked 
out right. If it didn’t, you can try again. (Notice 
that there is a p on the same line as the s com- 
mand. With few exceptions, p can follow any 
command; no other multi-command lines are 
legal.) 


It’s also legal to say 


s/...// 


which means ‘‘change the first string of charac- 
ters to ‘‘nothing’’, i.e., remove them. This is 
useful for deleting extra words in a line or 
removing extra letters from words. For instance, 
if you had 


Nowxx is the time 
you can say 

s/xx//p 
to get 

Now is the time 


Notice that // (two adjacent slashes) means ‘‘no 
characters’’, not a blank. There is a difference! 
(See below for another meaning of //.) 


Editor Tutorial 


Exercise 5: 


Experiment with the substitute command. 
See what happens if you substitute for some 
word on a line with several occurrences of that 
word. For example, do this: 


a 
the other side of the coin 


s/the/on the/p 
You will get 
on the other side of the coin 


A substitute command changes only the first 
occurrence of the first string. You can change all 
occurrences by adding a g (for ‘‘global’’) to the s 
command, like this: 


s/.../.../8p 


Try other characters instead of slashes to delimit 
the two sets of characters in the s command — 
anything should work except blanks or tabs. 


(If you get funny results using any of the 
characters 


ee 


read the section on “‘Special Characters’’.) 


Context Searching — ‘‘/.../°’ 


With the substitute command mastered, you 
can move on to another highly important idea of 
ed — context searching. 


Suppose you have the original three line text 
in the buffer: 


Now is the time 
for all good men 
to come to the aid of their party. 


Suppose you want to find the line that contains 
their so you can change it to the. Now with only 
three lines in the buffer, it’s pretty easy to keep 
track of what line the word their is on. But if the 
buffer contained several hundred lines, and 
you'd been making changes, deleting and rear- 
ranging lines, and so on, you would no longer 
really know what this line number would be. 
Context searching is simply a method of specify- 
ing the desired line, regardless of what its 
number is, by specifying some context on it. 


The way to say “‘search for a line that con- 
tains this particular string of characters’’ is to 


type 
/string of characters we want to find/ 


For example, the ed command 
/their/ 


—s 


) 


Editor Tutorial 


is a context search which is sufficient, to find the 
desired line — it will locate the next occurrence 
of the characters between slashes (‘‘their’’). It 
also sets dot to that line and prints the line for 
verification: 


to come to the aid of their party. 


“‘Next occurrence’? means that ed starts looking 
for the string at line .+1, searches to the end of 
the buffer, then continues at line 1 and searches 
to line dot. (That is, the search ‘“‘wraps around”’ 
from $ to 1.) It scans all the lines in the buffer 
until it either finds the desired line or gets back 
to dot again. If the given string of characters 
can’t be found in any line, ed types the error 
message 


? 


Otherwise it prints the line it found. 


You can do both the search for the desired 
line and a substitution all at once, like this: 


/their/s/their/the/p 
which will yield 
to come to the aid of the party. 


There were three parts to that last command: 
context search for the desired line, make the 
substitution, print the line. 


The expression /their/ is a context search 
expression. In their simplest form, all context 
search expressions are like this — a string of 
characters surrounded by slashes. Context 
searches are interchangeable with line numbers, 
so they can be used by themselves to find and 
print a desired line, or as line numbers for some 
other command, like s. They were used both 
ways in the examples above. 


Suppose the buffer contains the three familiar 
lines 


Now is the time 
for all good men 
to come to the aid of their party. 


Then the ed line numbers 


/Now/+1 
/good/ 
/party/—1 


are all context search expressions, and they all 
refer to the same line (line 2). To make a 
change in line 2, you could say 


/Now/+1s/good/bad/ 
or 
’ /good/s/good/bad/ 


or 


/party/—1s/good/bad/ 


The choice is dictated only by convenience. You 
could print all three lines by, for instance 


/Now/,/party/p 


or 
/Now/,/Now/+2p 


or by any number of similar combinations. The 
first one of these might be better if you don’t 
know how many lines are involved. (Of course, 
if there were only three lines in the buffer, you’d 
use 


1,$p 
but not if there were several hundred.) 


The basic rule is: a context search expression 
is the same as a line number, so it can be used 
wherever a line number is needed. 


Exercise 6: 


Experiment with context searching. Try a 
body of text with several occurrences of the 
same string of characters, and scan through it 
using the same context search. 


Try using context searches as line numbers 
for the substitute, print and delete commands. 
(They can also be used with r, w, and a.) 


Try context searching using ?text? instead 
of /text/. This scans lines in the buffer in 
reverse order rather than normal. This is some- 
times useful if you go too far while looking for 
some string of characters — it’s an casy way to 
back up. 


(If you get funny results with any of the 
characters 
e » Gt ee 


read the section on “‘Special Characters’’.) 


Ed provides a shorthand for repeating a con- 
text search for the same string. For example, 
the ed line number 


/string/ 


will find the next occurrence of string. It often 
happens that this is not the desired line, so the 
search must be repeated. This can be done by 
typing merely 


// 


This shorthand stands for “‘the most recently 
used context search expression.” It can also be 
used as the first string of the substitute com- 
mand, as in 


/string]/s//string2/ 


which will find the next occurrence of string] 
and replace it by string2. This can save a lot of 
typing. Similarly 


2? 


means ‘‘scan backwards for the same expres- 
sion.” 


6699 66n9> 
Cc 1 


Change and Insert — The and Com- 


mands 


This section discusses the change command 
c 


which is used to change or replace a group of 
one or more lines, and the insert command 


i 
which is used for inserting a group of one or 
more lines. 


“*‘Change’’, written as 
c 


is used to replace a number of lines with 
different lines, which are typed in at the termi- 
nal. For example, to change lines .+1 through $ 
to something else, type 


.+1,$c 
... type the lines of text you want here... 


The lines you type between the c command and 
the . will take the place of the original lines 
between start line and end line. This is most 
useful in replacing a line or several lines which 
have errors in them. 


If only one line is specified in the ¢ com- 
mand, then just that line is replaced. (You can 
type in as many replacement lines as you like.) 
Notice the use of . to end the input — this 
works just like the . in the append command 
and must appear by itself on a new line. If no 
line number is given, line dot is replaced. The 
value of dot is set to the last line you typed in. 


“Insert” is similar to append — for instance 


/string/i 
... type the lines to be inserted here... 


will insert the given text before the next line that 
contains ‘‘string’’. The text between i and . is 
inserted before the specified line. If no line 
number is specified dot is used. Dot is set to the 
* last line inserted. 


Editor Tutorial 


Exercise 7: 


‘‘Change”’ is rather like a combination of 
delete followed by insert. Experiment to verify 
that 


start, end d 
i 
wes feet Cas 


is almost the same as 


start, end c 
PER «ea ae 


These are not precisely the same if line $ gets 
deleted. Check this out. What is dot? 


Experiment with a and i, to see that they are 
similar, but not the same. You will observe that 


line-number a 
Pe hONE vies 


. 


appends after the given line, while 


line-number i 
Pe 2 ee 


inserts before it. Observe that if no line number 
is given, i inserts before line dot, while a 
appends after line dot. 


Moving Text Around — The ‘“‘m’? Command 


The move command m is used for cutting 
and pasting — it lets you move a group of lines 
from one place to another in the buffer. Sup- 
pose you want to put the first three lines of the 
buffer at the end instead. You could do it by 
saying: 


1,3w temp 

$r temp 

1,3d 
(Do you see why?) but you can do it a lot casier 
with the m command: 


1,3m$ 
The general case is 
start line, end line m after this line 


Notice that there is a third line to be specified — 
the place where the moved stuff gets put. Of 
course the lines to be moved can be specified by 
context searches; if you had 


Editor Tutorial 


First paragraph 


end of first paragraph. 
Second paragraph 


end of second paragraph. 
you could reverse the two paragraphs like this: 
/Second/,/end of second/m/First/—1 


Notice the —1: the moved text goes after the 
line mentioned. Dot is set to the last line 
moved. 


The Global Commands “‘g”’ and ‘‘y”’ 


The global command g is used to execute one 
or more ed commands on all those lines in the 
buffer that match some specified string. For 
example 


g/peling/p 
prints all lines that contain peling. More use- 
fully, 
g/peling/s//pelling/gp 
makes the substitution everywhere on the line, 
then prints each corrected line. Compare this to 
1,$s/peling/pelling/gp 


which only prints the last line substituted. 
Another subtle difference is that the g command 
does not give a ? if peling is not found where 
the s command will. 


There may be several commands (including 

a, ¢, i, r, w, but not g); in that case, every line 
except the last must end with a backslash \: 

g/xxx/.—1s/abce/def/\ 

-+2s/ghi/jkl/\ 

eB 
makes changes in the lines before and after each 
line that contains xxx, then prints all three lines. 


The vy command is the same as g, except that 
the commands are executed on every line that 
does not match the string following v: 


v/ /d 


deletes every line that does not contain a blank. 


Special Characters 


You may have noticed that things just don’t 
work right when you used some characters like ., 


'#, $, and others in context searches and the sub- 


stitute command. The reason is rather complex, 
although the cure is simple. Basically, ed treats 
these characters as special, with special mean- 
ings. For instance, in a context search or the first 
string of the substitute command only, . means 


“tany character,’’ not a period, so 


/x.y/ 


means ‘‘a line with an x, any character, and a 
y,"’ not just ‘‘a line with an x, a period, and a 
y.”’ A complete list of the special characters that 
can cause trouble is the following: 


ee eer Oe eM 


Warning: The backslash character \ is special to 
ed. For safety’s sake, avoid it where possible. If 
you have to use one of the special characters in a 
substitute command, you can turn off its magic 
meaning temporarily by preceding it with the 
backslash. Thus 


s/\\\.\*/backslash dot star/ 


will change \.# into ‘‘backslash dot star’. 

Here is a hurried synopsis of the other special 
characters. First, the circumflex ~ signifies the 
beginning of a line. Thus 

/* string/ 
finds string only if it is at the beginning of a 
line: it will find 
string 
but not 
the string ... 
The dollar-sign $ is just the opposite of the 
circumflex; it means the end of a line: 
/string$/ 
will only find an occurrence of string that is at 
the end of some line. This implies, of course, 
that 
/* string$/ 
will find only a line that contains just string, and 
/* .$/ 
finds a line containing exactly one character. 


The character ., as we mentioned above, 
matches anything; 


/x.y/ 
matches any of 


xty 

xy 

xy 

x.y 
This is useful in conjunction with *, which is a 
repetition character; a* is a shorthand for “‘any 
number of a’s,’’ so .* matches any number of 
anythings. This is used like this: 


10 


s/.*/stuff/ 


which changes an entire line, or 


s/.*,// 
which deletes all characters in the line up to and 
including the last comma. (Since .* finds the 
longest possible match, this goes up to the last 
comma.) 


[ is used with ] to form ‘‘character classes’’; 
for example, 


/(0123456789]/ 


matches any single digit — any one of the char- 
acters inside the braces will cause a match. This 
can be abbreviated to [0—9]. 


Finally, the & is another shorthand character 
— it is used only on the right-hand part of a sub- 
stitute command where it means ‘“‘whatever was 
matched on the left-hand side’’. It is used to 
save typing. Suppose the current line contained 


Now is the time 


and you wanted to put parentheses around it. 
You could just retype the line, but this is tedi- 
ous. Or you could say 


s/* /(/ 
s/$/)/ 


using your knowledge of ~ and $. But the easi- 
est way uses the &: 


s/./(&)/ 


This says ‘‘match the whole line, and replace it 
by itself surrounded by parentheses.”’ The & can 
be used several times in a line; consider using 


s/.*/&? &!!/ 
to produce 


Now is the time? Now is the time!! 


You don’t have to match the whole line, of 
course: if the buffer contains 


the end of the world 
you could type 
/world/s//& is at hand/ 
to produce 
the end of the world is at hand 


Observe this expression carefully, for it illus- 


‘ trates how to take advantage of ed to save typ- 


ing. The string /world/ found the desired line; 
the shorthand // found the same word in the 
line;,and the & saves you from typing it again. 


The & is a special character only within the 
replacement text of a substitute command, and 


Editor Tutorial 


has no special meaning elsewhere. You can turn 
off the special meaning of & by preceding it with 
a\: 


s/ampersand/\&/ 


will convert the word ‘‘ampersand”’ into the 
literal symbol & in the current line. 


Summary of Commands and Line Numbers 


The general form of ed commands is the 
command name, perhaps preceded by one or two 
line numbers, and, in the case of e, r, and w, 
followed by a file name. Only one command is 
allowed per line, but a p command may follow 
any other command (except for e, r, w and q). 


a: Append, that is, add lines to the buffer (at line 
dot, unless a-different line is specified). Append- 
ing continues until . is typed on a new line. Dot 
is set to the last line appended. 


c: Change the specified lines to the new text 
which follows. The new lines are terminated by 
a., as with a. If no lines are specified, replace 
line dot. Dot is set to last line changed. 


d: Delete the lines specified. If none are 
specified, delete line dot. Dot is set to the first 
undeleted line, unless $ is deleted, in which case 
dot is set to $. 

e: Edit new file. Any previous contents of the 
buffer are thrown away, so issue a w beforehand. 
f: Print remembered file name. If a name fol- 
lows f the remembered name will be set to it. 


g: The command 
g/---/commands 


will execute the commands on those lines that 
contain ---, which can be any context search 
expression. 


i: Insert lines before specified line (or dot) until 
a . is typed on a new line. Dot is set to last line 
inserted. 


m: Move lines specified to after the line named 
after m. Dot is set to the last line moved. 


p: Print specified lines. If none specified, print 
line dot. A single line number is equivalent to 
line-number p. A single return prints .+1, the 
next line. 


q: Quit ed. Wipes out all text in buffer if you 
give it twice in a row without first giving a w 
command. 


r: Read a file into buffer (at end unless specified 
elsewhere.) Dot is set to last line read. 


s: The command 


s/string] /string2/ 


Editor Tutorial 


substitutes the characters string] into, string2 in 
the specificd lines. If no lines are specified, 
make the substitution in line dot. Dot is set to 
last line in which a substitution took place, which 
means that if no substitution took place, dot is 
not changed. s changes only the first occurrence 
of string] on a linc; to change all of them, type 
a g after the final slash. 


vy: The command 

v/---/commands 
executes commands on those lines that do not 
contain ---. 
w: Write out buffer onto a file. Dot is not 
changed. 


.=: Print value of dot. (= by itself prints the 
value of $.) 


!: The line 

'command-line 
causes command-line to be executed as a UNIX 
command. 


/----- /: Context search. Search for next line 
which contains this string of characters. Print it. 
Dot is set to the line where string was found. 
Search starts at .+1, wraps around from § to 1, 
and continues to dot, if necessary. 


Deu---?: Context search in reverse direction, 
Start search at .—1, scan to 1, wrap around to §. 


January 1981 


