UNIX FOR BEGINNERS- 
SECOND EDITION 


1042 UNIX 
B.3.1 


UNIX for Beginners (Second Edition) 


Brian W. Kernighan 


Bell Laboratories 
Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974 


ABSTRACT 


This paper is meant to help new uscrs get started on the UNIXT operating system. 


It includes: 


@ basics needed for day-to-day use of the system — typing commands, correcting 
typing mistakes, logging in and out, mail, inter-terminal communication, the file 
system, printing files, redirecting 1/O, pipes, and the shell. 


e document preparation — a brief discussion of the major formatting programs and 
macro packages, hints on preparing documents, and capsule descriptions of some 


supporting software. 


e@ UNIX programming — using the editor, programming the shell, programming in C, 


other languages and tools. 


® pointers to additional sources of information about UNIX. 


INTRODUCTION 


From the user’s point of view, the UNIX 
operating system is easy to learn and use, and 
presents few of the usual impediments to getting 
the job done. It is hard, however, for the 
beginner to know where to start, and how to 
make the best use of the facilities available. The 
purpose of this introduction is to help new users 
get used to the main ideas of the UNIX system 
and start making effective use of it quickly. 


You should have a couple of other docu- 
ments with you for easy reference as you read 
this one. The most important is UNIX User's 
Manual; it’s often easier to tell you to read about 
something in the manual than to repeat its con- 
tents here. The other useful document is A 
Tutorial Introduction to the UNIX Text Editor, 
which will tell you how to use the editor to get 
texl — programs, data, documents — into the 
computer. 


A word of warning: the UNIX system has 


‘become quite popular, and there are several 


major variants in widespread use. Of course 
details also change with time. So although the 
basic structure of UNIX and how to use it is com- 
mon to all versions, there will certainly be a few 


+ UNIX is a trademark of Bell Laboratories. 


things which are different on your system from 
what is described here. We have tried to minim- 
ize the problem, but be aware of it. In cases of 
doubt, this paper describes Version 7 UNIX. 


This paper has four main sections: 


1. Getting Started: How to log in, how to type, 
what to do about mistakes in typing, how to 
log out. Some of this is dependent on which 
system you log into (phone numbers, for 
example) and what terminal you use, so this 
section must necessarily be supplemented by 
local information. 


2. Day-to-day Use: Things you need every day 
to use the system effectively: generally use- 
ful commands; the file system. 


3. Document Preparation: Preparing manu- 
scripts is one of the most common uses for 
UNIX systems. This section contains advice, 
but not extensive instructions on any of the 
formatting tools. 


4. Writing Programs: UNIX is an excellent sys- 
tem for developing programs. This section 
talks about some of the tools, but again is 
not a tutorial in any of the programming 
languages provided by the system. 


I. GETTING STARTED 


Logging In 


You must have a UNIX login name, which 
you can get from whoever administers your sys- 
tem. You also need to know the phone number, 
unless your system uses permanently connected 
terminals. The UNIX system is capable of deal- 
ing with a wide variety of terminals: Terminet 
300s; Execuport, TI and similar portables; video 
(CRT) terminals like the HP 2640, etc.; high- 
priced graphics terminals like the Tektronix 
4014; plotting terminals like those from GSI and 
DASI; and even the venerable Teletype in its 
various forms. But note: UNIX is strongly 
oriented towards devices with lower case. If your 
terminal produces only upper case (e.g., model 
33 Teletype, some video and portable terminals), 
life will be so difficult that you should look for 
another terminal. 


Be sure to set the switches appropriately on 
your device. Switches that might need to be 
adjusted include the speed, upper/lower case 
mode, full duplex, even parity, and any others 
that local wisdom advises. Establish a connec- 
tion using whatever magic is needed for your ter- 
minal; this may involve dialing a telephone call 
or merely flipping a switch, In either case, UNIX 
should type “‘login:”’ at you. If it types garbage, 
you may be at the wrong speed; check the 
switches. If that fails, push the ‘‘break’’ or 
“interrupt”? key a few times, slowly. If that fails 
to produce a login message, consult a guru. 

When you get a login: message, type your 
login name in lower case. Follow it by a 
RETURN; the system will not do anything until 
you type a RETURN. If a password is required, 
you will be asked for it, and (if possible) printing 
will be turned off while you type it. Don’t forget 
RETURN. 


The culmination of your login efforts is a 
“prompt character,’’ a single character that indi- 
cates that the system is ready to accept com- 
mands from you. The prompt character is usu- 
ally a dollar sign $ or a percent sign %. (You 
may also get a message of the day just before the 
prompt character, or a notification that you have 
mail.) 


Typing Commands 


Once you've seen the prompt character, you 


_ can type commands, which are requests that the 


system do something. Try typing 
date 


followed by RETURN. You should get back 
something like 


UNIX for Beginners 


Mon Jan 16 14:17:10 EST 1978 


Don’t forget the RETURN after the command, or 
nothing will happen. If you think you’re being 
ignored, type a RETURN; something should hap- 
pen. RETURN won’t be mentioned again, but 
don’t forget it — it has to be there at the end of 
each line. 


Another command you might try is who, 
which tells you everyone who is currently logged 
in: 


who 
gives something like 


mb ttyOl Jan 16 09:11 
ski tty05 Jan 16 09:33 
gam ttyll Jan 16 13:07 


The time is when the user logged in; ‘‘ttyxx’’ is 
the system’s idea of what terminal the user is on. 


If you make a mistake typing the command 
name, and refer to a non-existent command, you 
will be told. For example, if you type 


whom 
you will be told 
whom: not found 


Of course, if you inadvertently type the name of 
some other command, it will run, with more or 
less mysterious results. 


Strange Terminal Behavior 


Sometimes you can get into a state where 
your terminal acts strangely. For example, each 
letter may be typed twice, or the RETURN may 
not cause a line-feed or a return to the left mar- 
gin. You can often fix this by logging out and 
logging back in. Or you can read the description 
of the command stty in Section 1 of the UNIX 
User’s Manual. To get intelligent treatment of 
tab characters (which are much used in UNIX) if 
your terminal doesn’t have tabs, type 


stty —tabs 


and the system will convert each tab into the 
right number of blanks for you. If your terminal 
does have computer-settable tabs, the command 
tabs will set the stops correctly for you. 


Mistakes in Typing 


If you make a typing mistake, and see it 
before RETURN has been typed, there are two 
ways to recover. The sharp-character # erases 
the last character typed; in fact successive uses of 
# erase characters back to the beginning of the 
line (but not beyond). So if you type badly, you 
can correct as you go: 


UNIX for Beginners 


dd# atte#f#e 
is the same as date. 


The at-sign @ erases all of the characters 
typed so far on the current input line, so if the 
line is irretrievably fouled up, type an @ and 
start the line over. 


What if you must enter a sharp or at-sign as 
part of the text? If you precede either # or @ 
by a backslash \, it loses its erase meaning. So 
to enter a sharp or at-sign in something, type \# 
or \@. The system will always echo a new-line 
at you after your at-sign, even if preceded by a 
backslash. Don’t worry — the at-sign has been 
recorded, 


To erase a backslash, you have to type two 
sharps or two at-signs, as in \##. The backslash 
is used extensively in UNIX to indicate that the 
following character is in some way special. 


Read-ahead 


UNIX has full read-ahead, which means that 
you can type as fast as you want, whenever you 
want, even when some command is typing at 
you. If you type during output, your input char- 
acters will appear intermixed with the output 
characters, but they will be stored away and 
interpreted in the correct order. So you can type 
several commands one after another without 
waiting for the first to finish or even begin. 


Stopping a Program 


You can stop most programs by typing the 
character ‘“‘DEL’’ (perhaps called ‘‘delete’’ or 
“‘rubout’’ on your terminal). The “‘interrupt’’ or 
‘*break’’ key found on most terminals can also 
be used. In a few programs, like the text editor, 
DEL stops whatever the program is doing but 
leaves you in that program. Hanging up the 
phone will stop most programs. 


Logging Out 


The easiest way to log out is to hang up the 
phone. You can also type 


login 


and let someone else use the terminal you were 
on. It is usually not sufficient just to turn off the 
terminal. Most UNIX systems do not use a 
time-out mechanism, so you'll be there forever 
unless you hang up. 


Mail 


When you log in, you may sometimes get 
the message 


You have mail. 


UNIX provides a postal system so you can com- 
municate with other users of the system. To 
read your mail, type the command 


mail 


Your mail will be printed, one message at a time, 
most recent message first. After each message, 
mail waits for you to say what to do with it. The 
two basic responses are d, which deletes the mes- 
sage, and RETURN, which does not (so it will 
still be there the next time you read your mail- 
box). Other responses are described in the 
manual. (Earlier versions of mail do not process 
one message at a time, but are otherwise simi- 
lar.) 


How do you send mail to someone else? 
Suppose it is to go to “‘joe’’ (assuming ‘‘joe’’ is 
someone’s login name). The easiest way is this: 

mail joe 

now type in the text of the letter 

on as many lines as you like ... 

After the last line of the letter 

type the character ‘‘control-d’’, 

that is, hold down ‘‘control’’ and type 

a letter ‘‘d’’. 


And that’s it. The ‘‘control-d’’ sequence, often 
called ‘‘EOF’’ for end-of-file, is used throughout 
the system to mark the end of input from a ter- 
minal, so you might as well get used to it. 


For practice, send mail to yourself. (This 
isn’t as strange as it might sound — mail to one- 
self is a handy reminder mechanism.) 


There are other ways to send mail — you 
can send a previously prepared letter, and you 
can mail to a number of people all at once. For 
more details see mail(1). (The notation mail(1) 
means the command mail in Section 1 of the 
UNIX User’s Manual.) 


Writing to other users 


At some point, out of the blue will come a 
message like 


Message from joe tty07 ... 


accompanied by a startling beep. It means that 
Joe wants to talk to you, but unless you take 
explicit action you won't be able to talk back. To 
respond, type the command 


write joe 


This establishes a two-way communication path. 
Now whatever Joe types on his terminal will 
appear on yours and vice versa. The path is 
slow, rather like talking to the moon. (If you are 
in the middle of something, you have to get to a 
state where you can type a command. Normally, 
whatever program you are running has to 


terminate or be terminated. If you’re editing, 
you can escape temporarily from the editor — 
read the editor tutorial.) 


A protocol is needed to keep what you type 
from getting garbled up with what Joe types. 
Typically it’s like this: 


Joe types write smith and waits. 

Smith types write joe and waits. 

Joe now types his message (as many lines 
as he likes). When he’s ready for a 
reply, he signals it by typing (0), which 
stands for ‘‘over’’. 

Now Smith types a reply, also terminated 
by (0). 

This cycle repeats until someone gets 
tired; he then signals his intent to quit 
with (00), for ‘‘over and out’’. 

To terminate the conversation, each side 
must type a “‘control-d’’ character alone 
on a line. (‘‘Delete’’ also works.) When 
the other person types his ‘“‘control-d’’, 
you will get the message EOF on your 
terminal. 


If you write to someone who isn’t logged in, 
or who doesn’t want to be disturbed, you’ll be 
told. If the target is logged in but doesn’t answer 
after a decent interval, simply type “‘control-d’’. 


On-line Manual 


The UNIX User's Manual is typically kept 
on-line. If you get stuck on something, and 
can’t find an expert to assist you, you can print 
on your terminal some manual section that 
might help. This is also useful for getting the 
most up-to-date information on a command. To 
print a manual section, type ‘““man command- 
name’’. Thus to read up on the who command, 
type 

man who 
and, of course, 

man man 


tells all about the man command. 


Computer Aided Instruction 


Your UNIX system may have available a pro- 
gram called learn, which provides computer 
aided instruction on the file system and basic 
commands, the editor, document preparation, 
_and even C programming. Try typing the com- 
mand 


learn 


If learn exists on your system, it will tell you 
what to do from there. 


UNIX for Beginners 


Il. DAY-TO-DAY USE 


Creating Files — The Editor 


If you have to type a paper or a letter or a 
program, how do you get the information stored 
in the machine? Most of these tasks are done 
with the UNIX “‘text editor’ ed. Since ed is 
thoroughly documented in ed(1) and explained 
in A Tutorial Introduction to the UNIX Text Editor, 
we won't spend any time here describing how to 
use it. All we want it for right now is to make 
some files. (A file is just a collection of informa- 
tion stored in the machine, a simplistic but ade- 
quate definition.) 


To create a file called junk with some text in 
it, do the following: 


ed junk (invokes the text editor) 
a (command to ‘‘ed”’ to add text) 
now type in 
whatever text you want... 
(signals the end of adding text) 


The ‘*.’’ that signals the end of adding text must 
be at the beginning of a line by itself. Don’t for- 
get it, for until it is typed, no other ed com- 
mands will be recognized — everything you type 
will be treated as text to be added. 


At this point you can do various editing 
operations on the text you typed in, such as 
correcting spelling mistakes, rearranging para- 
graphs and the like. Finally, you must write the 
information you have typed into a file with the 
editor command w: 


w 


ed will respond with the number of characters it 
wrote into the file junk. 


Until the w command, nothing is stored per- 
manently, so if you hang up and go home the 
information is lost.* But after w the information 
is there permanently; you can re-access it any 
time by typing 


ed junk 


Type a q command to quit the editor. (If you try 
to quit without writing, ed will print a ? to rem- 
ind you. A second q gets you out regardless.) 


Now create a second file called temp in the 
same manner. You should now have two files, 
junk and temp. 


* This is not strictly true — if you hang up while editing, 
the data you were working on is saved in a file called 
ed.hup, which you can continue with at your next session. 


UNIX for Beginners 


What files are out there? 


The Is (for “‘list’’) command lists the names 
(not contents) of any of the files that UNIX 
knows about. If you type 


Is 
the response will be 


junk 
temp 


which are indeed the two files just created. The 
names are sorted into alphabetical order 
automatically, but other variations are possible. 
For example, the command 


ie, —f 


causes the files to be listed in the order in which 
they were last changed, most recent first. The 
—1 option gives a “‘long”’ listing: 


Is —l 
will produce something like 


—rw—rw—rw- 1 bwk 41 Jul 22 2:56 junk 
—rw—rw—rw-— 1 bwk 78 Jul 22 2:57 temp 


The date and time are of the last change to the 
file. The 41 and 78 are the number of characters 
(which should agree with the numbers you got 
from ed). bwk is the owner of the file, that is, 
the person who created it. The —rw—-rw—rw— 
tells who has permission to read and write the 
file, in this case everyone. 

Options can be combined: Is —It gives the 
same thing as Is —I, but sorted into time order. 
You can also name the files you’re interested in, 
and Is will list the information about them only. 
More details can be found in Is(1). 


The use of optional arguments that begin 
with a minus sign, like —t and —It, is a com- 
mon convention for UNIX programs. In general, 
if a program accepts such optional arguments, 
they precede any file name arguments. It is also 
vital that you separate the various arguments 
with spaces: Is—l is not the same as Is —l. 


Printing Files 


Now that you’ve got a file of text, how do 
you print it so people can look at it? There area 
host of programs that do that, probably more 
than are needed. 


One simple thing is to use the editor, since 


printing is often done just before making 


changes anyway. You can say 


ed junk 
1,$p 


ed will reply with the count of the characters in 
junk and then print all the lines in the file. 


After you learn how to use the editor, you can 
be selective about the parts you print. 


There are times when it’s not feasible to use 
the editor for printing. For example, there is a 
limit on how big a file ed can handle (several 
thousand lines). Secondly, it will only print one 
file at a time, and sometimes you want to print 
several, one after another. So here are a couple 
of alternatives. 


First is cat, the simplest of all the printing 
programs. cat simply prints on the terminal the 
contents of all the files named ina list. Thus 


cat junk 
prints one file, and 
cat junk temp 


prints two. The files are simply concatenated 
(hence the name ‘‘cat’’) onto the terminal. 


pr produces formatted printouts of files. As 
with cat, pr prints all the files named in a list. 
The difference is that it produces headings with 
date, time, page number and file name at the top 
of each page, and extra lines to skip over the 
fold in the paper. Thus, 


pr junk temp 


will print junk neatly, then skip to the top of a 
new page and print temp neatly. 


pr can also produce multi-column output: 
pr —3 junk 


prints junk in 3-column format. You can use 
any reasonable number in place of “*3”’ and pr 
will do its best. pr has other capabilities as well; 
see pr(1). 


It should be noted that pr is not a format- 
ting program in the sense of shuffling lines 
around and justifying margins. The true for- 
matters are nroff and troff, which we will get to 
in the section on document preparation. 


There are also programs that print files on a 
high-speed printer. Look in your manual under 
opr and Ipr. Which to use depends on what 
equipment is attached to your machine. 


Shuffling Files About 


Now that you have some files in the file sys- 
tem and some experience in printing them, you 
can try bigger things. For example, you can 
move a file from one place to another (which 
amounts to giving it a new name), like this: 


my junk precious 


This means that what used to be “‘junk’’ is now 
‘“‘precious’’. If you do an Is command now, you 
will get 


precious 
temp 


Beware that if you move a file to another one 
that already exists, the already existing contents 
are lost forever. 


If you want to make a copy of a file (that is, 
to have two versions of something), you can use 
the cp command: 


cp precious temp] 


makes a duplicate copy of precious in temp]. 


Finally, when you get tired of creating and 
moving files, there is a command to remove files 
from the file system, called rm. 


rm temp templ 


will remove both of the files named. 


You will get a warning message if one of the 
named files wasn’t there, but otherwise rm, like 
most UNIX commands, does its work silently. 
There is no prompting or chatter, and error mes- 
sages are occasionally curt. This terseness is 
sometimes disconcerting to newcomers, but 
experienced users find it desirable. 


What’s in a File Name 


So far we have used file names without ever 
saying what’s a legal name, so it’s time for a 
couple of rules. First, file names are limited to 
14 characters, which is enough to be descriptive. 
Second, although you can use almost any charac- 
ter in a file name, common sense says you 
should stick to ones that are visible, and that you 
should probably avoid characters that might be 
used with other meanings. We have already 
seen, for example, that in the Is command, 
Is —t means to list in time order. So if you had 
a file whose name was —t, you would have a 
tough time listing it by name. Besides the minus 
sign, there are other characters which have spe- 
cial meaning. To avoid pitfalls, you would do 
well to use only letters, numbers and the period 
until you're familiar with the situation. 


On to some more positive suggestions. Sup- 
pose you're typing a large document like a book. 
Logically this divides into many small pieces, like 
chapters and perhaps sections. Physically it must 
be divided too, for ed will not handle really big 
files. Thus you should type the document as a 
number of files. You might have a separate file 
for each chapter, called 


chapl 
chap2 
GIG cas 


Or, if each chapter were broken into several files, 
you might have 


UNIX for Beginners 


chap!.1 
chap1.2 
chap1.3 


chap2.1 
chap2.2 


You can now tell at a glance where a particular 
file fits into the whole. 


There are advantages to a systematic naming 
convention which are not obvious to the novice 
UNIX user. What if you wanted to print the 
whole book? You could say 


pr chap1.1 chapl.2 chap1.3 ... 


but you would get tired pretty fast, and would 
probably even make mistakes. Fortunately, 
there is a shortcut. You can say 


pr chap+ 


The * means ‘‘anything at all,’ so this translates 
into ‘‘print all files whose names begin with 
chap’’, listed in alphabetical order. 


This shorthand notation is not a property of 
the pr command, by the way. It is system-wide, 
a service of the program that interprets com- 
mands (the ‘‘shell,’’ sh(1)). Using that fact, 
you can see how to list the names of the files in 
the book: 


Is chap* 
produces 


chap1.1 
chap1,2 
chap1.3 


The * is not limited to the last position in a file 
name — it can be anywhere and can occur 
several times. Thus 


rm *junk* *temp* 


removes all files that contain junk or temp as 
any part of their name. As a special case, * by 
itself matches every file name, so 


pr + 
prints all your files (alphabetical order), and 
rm * 


removes all files. (You had better be very sure 
that’s what you wanted to say!) 


The * is not the only pattern-matching 
feature available. Suppose you want to print 
only chapters 1 through 4 and 9. Then you can 
say 


UNIX for Beginners 


pr chap[12349]« 


The [...] means to match any of the characters 
inside the brackets. A range of consccutive 
letters or digits can be abbreviated, so you can 
also do this with 


pr chap[1—49]« 


Letters can also be used within brackets: [a—z] 
matches any character in the range a through z. 


The ? pattern matches any single character, 
50 


Is ? 


lists all files which have single-character names, 
and 


Is —1 chap?.1 


lists information about the first file of each 
chapter (chap1.1, chap2.1, etc.). 


Of these niccties, * is certainly the most use- 
ful, and you should get used to it. The others 
are frills, but worth knowing. 


If you should ever have to turn off the spe- 
cial meaning of *, ?, etc., enclose the entire 
argument in single quotes, as in 


i ee 


We'll see some more examples of this shortly. 


What’s in a File Name, Continued 


When you first made that file called junk, 
how did the system know that there wasn’t 
another junk somewhere else, especially since 
the person in the next office is also reading this 
tutorial? The answer is that generally each user 
has a private directory, which contains only the 
files that belong to him. When you log in, you 
are “‘in’’ your directory. Unless you take special 
action, when you create a new file, it is made in 
the directory that you are currently in; this is 
most often your own directory, and thus the file 
is unrelated to any other file of the same name 
that might exist in someone else’s directory. 


The set of all files is organized into a (usu- 
ally big) tree, with your files located several 
branches into the tree. It is possible for you to 
“‘walk’’ around this tree, and to find any file in 
the system, by starting at the root of the tree and 
walking along the proper set of branches. Con- 
versely, you can start where you are and walk 
toward the root. 


Let’s try the latter first. The basic tools is 
the command pwd (‘‘print working directory’’), 
which prints the name of the directory you are 
currently in. 


Although the details will vary according to 
the system you are on, if you give the command 
pwd, it will print something like 


/usr/your_name 


This says that you are currently in the directory 
your-name, which is in turn in the directory 
/usr, which is in turn in the root directory called 
by convention just /. (Even if it’s not called 
/usr on your system, you will get something 
analogous. Make the corresponding changes and 
read on.) 


If you now type 
Is /usr/your_name 


you should get exactly the same list of file names 
as you get from a plain Is: with no arguments, Is 
lists the contents of the current directory; given 
the name of a directory, it lists the contents of 
that directory. 


Next, try 
Is /usr 


This should print a long series of names, among 
which is your own login name your-name, On 
many systems, usr is a directory that contains 
the directories of all the normal users of the sys- 
tem, like you. 


The next step is to try 


Is / 


You should get a response something like this 
(although again the details may be different): 

bin 

dey 

etc 

lib 

tmp 

usr 


This is a collection of the basic directories of files 
that the system knows about; we are at the root 
of the tree. 


Now try 
cat /usr/your_name/junk 


(if junk is still around in your directory). The 
name 


/usr/your_name/junk 


is called the path-name of the file that you nor- 
mally think of as ‘‘junk’’. ‘‘Path-name”’ has an 
obvious meaning: it represents the full name of 
the path you have to follow from the root 
through the tree of directories to get to a particu- 
lar file. It is a universal rule in the UNIX system 
that anywhere you can use an ordinary file name, 
you can use a path-name. 


Here is a picture that may make this clearer: 
(root) 


/\\ 


bin etc usr dev tmp 


/\\ iets ee /\\ 


adam eve mary 


: / \ ink 


junk temp 


Notice that Mary’s junk is unrelated to Eve’s. 


This isn’t too exciting if all the files of 
interest arc in your own directory, but if you 
work with somcone else or on several projects 
concurrently, it becomes handy indeed. For 
example, your friends can print your book by 
saying 


pr /usr/your_name/chap* 


Similarly, you can find out what files your neigh- 
bor has by saying 


Is /usr/neighbor_name 
or make your own copy of one of his files by 


cp /usr/your_neighbor/his_file your_file 


If your neighbor doesn’t want you poking 
around in his files, or vice versa, privacy can be 
arranged. Each file and directory has read-write- 
execute permissions for the owner, a group, and 
everyone else, which can be set to control access. 
See Is(1) and chmod(1) for details. As a matter 
of observed fact, most users most of the time 
find openness of more benefit than privacy. 


As a final experiment with path-names, try 
Is /bin /usr/bin 


Do some of the names look familiar? When you 
run a program, by typing its name after the 
prompt character, the system simply looks for a 
file of that name. It normally looks first in your 
directory (where it typically doesn’t find it), then 
in /bin and finally in /usr/bin. There is nothing 
magic about commands like cat or Is, except that 
they have been collected into a couple of places 
to be easy to find and administer. 


What if you work regularly with someone 
else on common information in his directory? 
You could just log in as your friend each time 
you want to, but you can also say “‘I want to 
work on his files instead of my own’’. This is 
done by changing the directory that you are 
currently in: 


ed /usr/your_friend 


UNIX for Beginners 


Now when you use a file name in something like 
cat or pr, it refers to the file in your friend’s 
directory. Changing directories doesn’t affect 
any permissions associated with a file — if you 
couldn’t access a file from your own directory, 
changing to another directory won’t alter that 
fact. Of course, if you forget what directory 
you’re in, type 


pwd 


to find out. 


It is usually convenient to arrange your own 
files so that all the files related to one thing are 
in a directory separate from other projects. For 
example, when you write your book, you might 
want to keep all the text in a directory called 
book. So make one with 


mkdir book 
then go to it with 
cd book 


then start typing chapters. The book is now 
found in (presumably) 


/usr/your_name/book 
To remove the directory book, type 


rm book /* 
rmdir book 


The first command removes all files from the 
directory; the second removes the empty direc- 
tory. 


You can go up one level in the tree of files 
by saying 


ed .. 


46, 25 


..’’ is the name of the parent of whatever direc- 
oe 99 


tory you are currently in. For completeness, “*. 
is an alternate name for the directory you are in. 


Using Files instead of the Terminal 


Most of the commands we have seen so far 
produce output on the terminal; some, like the 
editor, also take their input from the terminal. It 
is universal in UNIX systems that the terminal 
can be replaced by a file for either or both of 
input and output. As one example, 


makes a list of files on your terminal. But if you 
say 


Is >file_list 


a list of your files will be placed in the file 
file_list (which will be created if it doesn’t 
already exist, or overwritten if it does). The 
symbol > means “‘put the output on the 


UNIX for Beginners 


following file, rather than on the terminal.” 
Nothing. is produced on the terminal. As 
another example, you could combine several files 
into one by capturing the output of cat in a file: 


cat fl f2 f3 >temp 


The symbol >> operates very much like > 
does, except that it means ‘‘add to the end of.” 
That is, 


cat fl f2 {3 >>temp 


means to concatenate fl, f2 and f3 to the end of 
whatever is already in temp, instead of overwrit- 
ing the existing contents. As with >, if temp 
doesn’t exist, it will be created for you. 


In a similar way, the symbol < means to 
take the input for a program from the following 
file, instead of from the terminal. Thus, you 
could make up a script of commonly used editing 
commands and put them into a file called script. 
Then you can run the script on a file by saying 


ed file <script 


As another example, you can use ed to prepare a 
letter in file let, then send it to several people 
with 


mail adam eve mary joe <let 


Pipes 

One of the novel contributions of the UNIX 
system is the idea of a pipe. A pipe is simply a 
way to connect the output of one program to the 
input of another program, so the two run as a 
sequence of processes — a pipeline. 


For example, 
prfgh 


will print the files f, g, and h, beginning cach on 
a new page. Suppose you want them run 
together instead. You could say 


cat f g h >temp 
pr <temp 
rm temp 


but this is more work than necessary. Clearly 
what we want is to take the output of cat and 
connect it to the input of pr. So let us use a 


pipe: 
cat f g h | pr 


The vertical bar | means to take the output from 


‘eat, which would normally have gone to the ter- 


minal, and put it into pr to be neatly formatted. 


There are many other examples of pipes. 
For example, 


Is | pr —3 


prints a list of your files in three columns. The 
program we counts the number of lines, words 
and characters in its input, and as we saw earlier, 
who prints a list of currently-logged on people, 
one per line. Thus 


who | we 


tells how many people are logged on. And of 
course 


Is | we 


counts your files. 


Any program that reads from the terminal 
can read from a pipe instead; any program that 
writes on the terminal can drive a pipe. You can 
have as many elements in a pipeline as you wish. 


Many UNIX programs are written so that 
they will take their input from one or more files 
if file arguments are given; if no arguments are 
given they will read from the terminal, and thus 
can be used in pipelines. pr is one example: 


pr —-3abe 


prints files a, b and ¢ in order in three columns. 
But in 


cat a bec | pr —3 


pr prints the information coming down the pipe- 
line, still in three columns. 


The Shell 


We have already mentioned once or twice 
the mysterious “‘shell,”” which is in fact sh(1). 
The shell is the program that interprets what you 
type as commands and arguments. It also looks 
after translating *, etc., into lists of file names, 
and <, >, and | into changes of input and out- 
put streams. 


The shell has other capabilities too. For 
example, you can run two programs with one 
command line by separating the commands with 
a semicolon; the shell recognizes the semicolon 
and breaks the line into two commands. Thus 


date; who 


does both commands before returning with a 
prompt character. 


You can also have more than one program 
running simultaneously if you wish. For cxam- 
ple, if you are doing something time-consuming, 
like the editor script of an earlier section, and 
you don’t want to wait around for the results 
before starting something else, you can say 


ed file <script & 


10 


The ampersand at the end of a command line 
says ‘‘start this command running, then take 
further commands from the terminal immedi- 
ately,’ that is, don’t wait for it to complete. 
Thus the script will begin, but you can do some- 
thing else at the same time. Of course, to keep 
the output from interfering with what you’re 
doing on the terminal, it would be better to say 


ed file <script >script.out & 


which saves the output lines in a file called 
script.out. 


When you initiate a command with &, the 
system replies with a number called the process 
number, which identifies the command in case 
you later want to stop it. If you do, you can say 


kill process_number 


If you forget the process number, the command 
ps will tell you about everything you have run- 
ning. (If you are desperate, kill 0 will kill all 
your processes.) And if you’re curious about 
other people, psa will tell you about all pro- 
grams that are currently running. 


You can say 
(command_1; command_2; command_3) & 


to start three commands in the background, or 
you can start a background pipeline with 


command_1 | command_2 & 


Just as you can tell the editor or some simi- 
lar program to take its input from a file instead 
of from the terminal, you can tell the shell to 
read a file to get commands. (Why not? The 
shell, after all, is just a program, albeit a clever 
one.) For instance, suppose you want to set tabs 
on your terminal, and find out the date and 
who’s on the system every time you log in. 
Then you can put the three necessary commands 
(tabs, date, who) into a file, let’s call it startup, 
and then run it with 


sh startup 


This says to run the shell with the file startup as 
input. The effect is as if you had typed the con- 
tents of startup on the terminal. 


If this is to be a regular thing, you can elim- 
inate the need to type sh: simply type, once only, 
the command 


chmod +x startup 
» and thereafter you need only say 


startup 


UNIX for Beginners 


to run the sequence of commands, The 
chmod(1) command marks the file executable; 
the shell recognizes this and runs it as a 
sequence of commands. 


If you want startup to run automatically 
every time you log in, create a file in your login 
directory called .profile, and place in it the line 
startup. When the shell first gains control when 
you log in, it looks for the .profile file and does 
whatever commands it finds in it. We'll get back 
to the shell in the section on programming. 


I1l. DOCUMENT PREPARATION 


UNIX systems are used extensively for docu- 
ment preparation. There are two major format- 
ting programs, that is, programs that produce a 
text with justified right margins, automatic page 
numbering and titling, automatic hyphenation, 
and the like. nroff is designed to produce output 
on terminals and line-printers. troff (pro- 
nounced ‘“‘tee-roff’’) instead drives a photo- 
typesetter, which produces very high quality out- 
put on photographic paper. This paper was for- 
matted with troff. 


Formatting Packages 


The basic idea of nroff and troff is that the 
text to be formatted contains within it ‘‘format- 
ting commands”’ that indicate in detail how the 
formatted text is to look. For example, there 
might be commands that specify how long lines 
are, whether to use single or double spacing, and 
what running titles to use on each page. 


Because nroff and troff are relatively hard to 
learn to use effectively, several ‘‘packages’’ of 
canned formatting requests are available to let 
you specify paragraphs, running titles, footnotes, 
multi-column output, and so on, with little effort 
and without having to learn nroff and troff. 
These packages take a modest effort to learn, but 
the rewards for using them are so great that it is 
time well spent. 


In this section, we will provide a hasty look 
at the “‘manuscript’’ package known as —ms. 
Formatting requests typically consist of a period 
and two upper-case letters, such as .TL, which is 
used to introduce a title, or .PP to begin a new 
paragraph. 


A document is typed so it looks something 
like this: 


UNIX for Beginners 
oF 
title of document 
AU 
author name 
‘SH 
section heading 
-PP 
paragraph ... 
-PP 
another paragraph ... 
SH 
another section heading 
-PP 
etc. 


The lines that begin with a period are the for- 
matting requests. For example, .PP calls for 
starting a new paragraph. The precise meaning 
of .PP depends on what output device is being 
used (typesetter or terminal, for instance), and 
on what publication the document will appear in. 
For example, —ms normally assumes that a 
paragraph is preceded by a space (one line in 
nroff, % line in troff), and the first word is 
indented. These rules can be changed if you 
like, but they are changed by changing the 
interpretation of .PP, not by re-typing the docu- 
ment, 


To actually produce a document in standard 
format using —ms, use the command 


troff —ms files ... 
for the typesetter, and 
nroff —ms files ... 


for a terminal. The —ms argument tells troff 
and nroff to use the manuscript package of for- 
matting requests. 


There are several similar packages; check 
with a local expert to determine which ones are 
in common use on your machine. 


Supporting Tools 


In addition to the basic formatters, there is a 
host of supporting programs that help with docu- 
ment preparation. The list in the next few para- 
graphs is far from complete, so browse through 
the manual and check with people around you 
for other possibilities. 


eqn and neqn let you integrate mathematics 
into the text of a document, in an easy-to-learn 


language that closely resembles the way you 


would speak it aloud. For example, the eqn 
input 


sum from i=0 to n x sub i “=” pi over 2 


produces the output 


a 
yxy = 
ism 2 


11 


The program tbl provides an analogous ser- 
vice for preparing tabular material; it does all the 
computations necessary to align complicated 
columns with elements of varying widths. 


spell and typo detect possible spelling mis- 
takes in a document. spell works by comparing 
the words in your document to a dictionary, 
printing those that are not in the dictionary. It 
knows cnough about English spelling to detect 
plurals and the like, so it docs a very good job. 
typo looks for words which are ‘‘unusual’’, and 
prints those. Spelling mistakes tend to be more 
unusual, and thus show up early when the most 
unusual words are printed first. 


grep looks through a set of files for lines 
that contain a particular text pattern (rather like 
the editor’s context search does, but on a bunch 
of files). For example, 


grep ‘ingS’ chap* 


will find all lines that end with the letters ing in 
the files chap*. (It is almost always a good prac- 
tice to put single quotes around the pattern 
you're searching for, in case it contains charac- 
ters like * or $ that have a special meaning to the 
shell.) grep is often useful for finding out in 
which of a set of files the misspelled words 
detected by spell are actually located. 


diff prints a list of the differences between 
two files, so you can compare two versions of 
something automatically (which certainly beats 
proofreading by hand). 


we counts the words, lines and characters in 
a set of files. tr translates characters into other 
characters; for example it will convert upper to 
lower case and vice versa. This translates upper 
into lower: 


tr A—Z a—z <input >output 


sort sorts files in a variety of ways; cref 
makes cross-references; ptx makes a permuted 
index (keyword-in-context listing). sed provides 
many of the editing facilities of ed, but can apply 
them to arbitrarily long inputs. awk provides the 
ability to do both pattern matching and numeric 
computations, and to conveniently process fields 
within lines. These programs are for more 
advanced users, and they are not limited to 
document preparation. Put them on your list of 
things to learn about. 


Most of these programs are either indepen- 
dently documented (like eqn and tbl), or are 
sufficiently simple that the description in the 
UNIX User's Manual is adequate explanation. 


12 


Hints for Preparing Documents 


Most documents go through several versions 
(always more than you expected) before they are 
finally finished. Accordingly, you should do 
whatever possible to make the job of changing 
them easy. 


First, when you do the purely mechanical 
operations of typing, type so that subsequent 
editing will be easy. Start cach sentence on a 
new line. Make lines short, and break lines at 
natural places, such as after commas and semi- 
colons, rather than randomly. Since most people 
change documents by rewriting phrases and 
adding, deleting and rearranging sentences, these 
precautions simplify any editing you have to do 
later. 


Keep the individual files of a document 
down to modest size, perhaps ten to fifteen 
thousand characters. Larger files edit more 
slowly, and of course if you make a dumb mis- 
take it’s better to have clobbered a small file 
than a big one. Split into files at natural boun- 
daries in the document, for the same reasons 
that you start each sentence on a new line. 


The second aspect of making change easy is 
to not commit yourself to formatting details too 
early. One of the advantages of formatting pack- 
ages like —ms is that they permit you to delay 
decisions to the last possible moment. Indeed, 
until a document is printed, it is not even 
decided whether it will be typeset or put on a line 
printer. 


As a rule of thumb, for all but the most 
trivial jobs, you should type a document in terms 
of a set of requests like .PP, and then define 
them appropriately, either by using one of the 
canned packages (the better way) or by defining 
your own nroff and troff commands. As long as 
you have entered the text in some systematic 
way, it can always be cleaned up and re- 
formatted by a judicious combination of editing 
commands and request definitions. 


IV. PROGRAMMING 


There will be no attempt made to teach any 
of the programming languages available but a 
few words of advice are in order. One of the 
reasons why the UNIX system is a productive 
programming environment is that there is 
already a rich set of tools available, and facilities 
like pipes, I/O redirection, and the capabilities of 
- the shell often make it possible to do a job by 
pasting together programs that already exist 
instead of writing from scratch. 


UNIX for Beginners 


The Shell 


The pipe mechanism lets you fabricate quite 
complicated operations out of spare parts that 
already exist. For example, the first draft of the 
spell program was (roughly) 


cat... collect the files 
ss: t each word on a new line 
pu 
| tr... delete punctuation, etc. 
| sort into dictionary order 


| unig discard duplicates 
| comm print words in text 
but not in dictionary 


More pieces have been added subsequently, but 
this goes a long way for such a small effort. 


The editor can be made to do things that 
would normally require special programs on 
other systems. For example, to list the first and 
last lines of each of a set of files, such as a book, 
you could laboriously type 


But you can do the job much more easily. One 
way is to type 


Is chap+ >temp 


to get the list of file names into a file. Then edit 
this file to make the necessary series of editing 
commands (using the global commands of ed), 
and write it into script. Now the command 


ed <script 


will produce the same output as the laborious 
hand typing. Alternately (and more easily), you 
can use the fact that the shell will perform loops, 
repeating a set of commands over and over again 
for a set of arguments: 


for i in chaps 
do 

ed Si <script 
done 


This sets the shell variable i to each file name in 
turn, then does the command. You can type this 
command at the terminal, or put it in a file for 
later execution. 


Programming the Shell 


An option often overlooked by newcomers is 
that the shell is itself a programming language, 
with variables, control flow (if-else, while, for, 


UNIX for Beginners 


case), subroutines, and interrupt handling. Since 
there are many building-block programs, you can 
sometimes avoid writing a new program merely 
by piecing together some of the building blocks 
with shell command files. 


We will not go into any details here; exam- 
ples and rules can be found in the UNIX Shell 
Tutorial, by G. A. Snyder and J. R. Mashey. 


Programming in C 

If you are undertaking anything substantial, 
C is the only reasonable choice of programming 
language: everything in the UNIX system is tuned 
to it. The system itself is written in C, as are 
most of the programs that run on it. It is an 
easy language to use once you get started. C is 
introduced and fully described in The C Program- 
ming Language by B. W. Kernighan and D. M. 
Ritchie (Prentice-Hall, 1978); several sections 
describe the system interfaces, that is, how you 
do I/O and similar functions. Read UNIX Pro- 
gramming for more complicated things. 


Most input and output in C is best handled 
with the standard I/O library, which provides a 
set of I/O functions that exist in compatible 
form on most machines that have C compilers. 
In general, it’s wisest to confine the system 
interactions in a program to the facilities pro- 
vided by this library. 


C programs that don’t depend too much on 
special features of UNIX (such as pipes) cai be 
moved to other computers that have C com- 
pilers. The list of such machines grows daily; in 
addition to the original PDP-11, it currently 
includes at least Honeywell 6000, IBM 370, Inter- 
data 8/32, Data General Nova and Eclipse, 
HP 2100, Harris /7, VAX 11/780, SEL 86, and 
Zilog Z80. Calls to the standard 1/O library will 
work on all of these machines. 


There are a number of supporting programs 
that go with C. lint checks C programs for 
potential portability problems, and detects errors 
such as mismatched argument types and unini- 
tialized variables. 


For larger programs (anything whose source 
is on more than one file) make allows you to 
specify the dependencies among the source files 
and the processing steps needed to make a new 
version; it then checks the times that the pieces 
were last changed and does the minimal amount 
of recompiling to create a consistent updated ver- 


‘ sion. 


The debugger adb is useful for digging 
through the dead bodies of C programs, but is 
rather hard to learn to use effectively. The most 
effective debugging tool is still careful thought, 
coupled with judiciously placed print statements. 


13 


The C compiler provides a limited instru- 
mentation service, so you can find out where 
programs spend their time and what parts are 
worth optimizing. Compile the routines with the 
—p option; after the test run, use prof to print 
an execution profile. The command time will 
give you the gross run-time statistics of a pro- 
gram, but they are not super accurate or repro- 
ducible. 


Other Languages 


If you have to use Fortran, there are two 
possibilities. You might consider Ratfor, which 
gives you the decent control structures and frec- 
form input that characterize C, yet lets you write 
code that is still portable to other environments. 
Bear in mind that UNIX Fortran tends to produce 
large and relatively slow-running programs. 
Furthermore, supporting software like adb, prof, 
etc., are all virtually useless with Fortran pro- 
grams. There may also be a Fortran 77 compiler 
on your system. If so, this is a viable alternative 
to Ratfor, and has the non-trivial advantage that 
it is compatible with C and related programs. 
(The Ratfor processor and C tools can be used 
with Fortran 77 too.) 


If your application requires you to translate a 
language into a set of actions or another 
language, you are in effect building a compiler, 
though probably a small one. In that case, you 
should be using the yace compiler-compiler, 
which helps you develop a compiler quickly. The 
lex lexical analyzer generator does the same job 
for the simpler languages that can be expressed 
as regular expressions. It can be used by itself, 
or as a front end to recognize inputs for a 
yacc-based program. Both yace and lex require 
some sophistication to use, but the initial effort 
of learning them can be repaid many times over 
in programs that are easy to change later on. 


Most UNIX systems also make available 
other languages, such as Algol 68, APL, Basic, 
Lisp, Pascal, and Snobol. Whether these are 
useful depends largely on the local environment: 
if someone cares about the language and has 
worked on it, it may be in good shape. If not, 
the odds are strong that it will be more trouble 
than it’s worth. 


V. ADDITIONAL READING 


See the UNIX Documentation Road Map by 
G. A. Snyder and J.R. Mashey for additional 
reading suggestions. 


January 1981 


