6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


4. SETTING UP THE UNIX SYSTEM (DEC) 
GENERAL 


This section describes the load, update, and configuration procedures involved in installing a UNIX operat- 
ing system on the following DEC processors: 


e Digital Equipment Corp. VAX-11/780, 11/750 
e Digital Equipment Corp. PDP-11. 


In the case of the PDP-11, this section is directed mainly toward installing the UNIX system on the 11/70 (the 
11/45 is really too small for anything but a stripped down version of Release 5.0). 


For setup information pertaining to the 3B20S Processor, refer to the section “SETTING UP THE UNIX 
SYSTEM (3B208)”. : 


A. Prerequisites 


Before attempting to generate a UNIX operating system, the system administrator should understand that 
a considerable knowledge of the related documentation is required and assumed. In particular, the administra- 
tor should be very familiar with the following documents: 


e UNIX System User’s Guide 
e UNIX System User’s Manual 


e UNIX System Administrator’s Manual 
e UNIX System Operations Guide 
e All sections in the UNIX System Administrator’s Guide. 


Throughout this section, each reference of the form name(1M), name(7), or name(8) refers to entries in 
the UNIX System Administrator’s Manual. All other references to entries of the form name(N), where “N” 
is a number (1 through 6) possibly followed by a letter, refer to entry name in section N of the UNIX System 
User’s Manual. 


The system administrator must have a basic understanding of the operation of the hardware. This includes 
the operation of the console and the tape and disk drives, which are assumed to have standard UNIX system 
addresses and interrupt vectors. It is also assumed that the hardware works and has been completely installed. 
All appropriate DEC diagnostics should have been run to test the configuration, and a detailed description of 
the hardware including device addresses, interrupt vectors, and bus levels is needed. This information is neces- 
sary to generate a UNIX system. 


B. Procedure 

The UNIX system is distributed on two magnetic tapes, recorded in 9-track format at either 800 bpi or 1600 
bpi. Distribution tapes will be marked either ‘“PDP-11” or “VAX”, 800 bpi or 1600 bpi. Make sure you have the 
correct tape for your machine. The UNIX system Release 5.0 is to be installed using only the initial load proce- 
dures described in this document. 


Initial Load 


The initial load program (on Tape 1) will copy a file system from tape (VAX: either a TE16, a TU78, or a 
TS11; PDP-11: either a TU10 or a TU16) to disk (VAX: either an RP06, an RM05, or an RM80; PDP-11: either 


Page 41 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


an RP03, an RP06, or an RM0O5). In this document, RP04/5 drives are considered to be equivalent to RP06 drives; 
any differences will be noted explicitly. Once the root file system has been successfully loaded to disk, the UNIX 
system may be booted and the available utility programs used to complete the installation. 


Update 


The update procedures are to be used only on releases that are designated as update releases. The epio(1) 
program is used to perform all updates. The epio program will not update any file if its replacement has a modi- 
fication time that is less than (i.e., earlier than) the modification time of the original file. Certain administrative 
files (e.g., etc/passwd) are sent with a modification time of January 1, 1970 to ensure that they do not replace 
their counterparts during updates. Any file not copied will cause cpio to print a message to that effect. These 
messages should always be investigated to ensure that any files not copied were of that type. However, note 
that, depending on respective modification times, a locally-modified file may get updated, thus destroying the 
local modifications. 


One of the most common problems that can arise during an installation is running out of disk space when 
performing an update. Should this occur, the original contents of the file system should be restored from a 
backup copy and the contents of the update tape should be read into a spare file system using the epio program. 
Unwanted material can then be removed and the original file system can be updated from this new file system 
using the —pdm options of cpio. 


LOAD PROCEDURES 
A. Distribution Tape Format 
Tape 1 contains nine files: a loader, a physical copy of the root file system, the cpio program, a cpio struc- 


tured copy of the root file system, and five files (epio format) that represent selectable items. Root refers to 
the directory ‘“/”, which is the root of all the directory trees. The format of this tape is as follows: 


file 1: Tape boot loader—512 bytes; Tape boot loader—512 bytes; Initial load program—several 
512-byte records; 

file 2: root file system (physical)—5120-byte records (blocking factor 10); 

file 3: epio program (latest version)—several 512-byte records (to be used only for updating an 


earlier UNIX system release); 


file 4: the root file system (structured in cpio format)—several 5120-byte records (to be used only 
for updating an earlier UNIX system release); 
file 5; on-line manual pages (same format as file 4); & 
file 6: on-line documents (same format as file 4); 
file 7: RJE software (same format as file 4); 
file 8: NSC software (same format as file 4); 
file 9: graphics software (same format as file 4). & 
The root (/) file system contains the following directories: 
bek: Directory used to mount a backup file system for file restoring. 
bin: ; Public commands; described in Section 1 of the UNIX System User’s Manual. wy 


Page 42 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


dev: Special files, all the devices on the system. 

etc: Administrative ieiersiiie and tables. 

lib: Public libraries, parts of the assembler, C compiler. 

mnt: Directory used to mount a file system. 

lost+found: Directory used by fsek(1M) for disconnected files. 

stand: Stand-alone programs. 

tmp: Directory used for temporary files; should be cleaned at reboot. 
usr: Directory used to mount the /usr file system. 


B. Initial Load of Root 
Mount Tape 1 on drive 0 and position it at the load point. 
PDP-11 


Boot the tape by reading either record 0 or 1 into memory starting at address 0 and start execution at ad- 
dress 0. This may be accomplished by using a standard DEC ROM bootstrap loader, a special ROM, or some man- 
ual procedure; see romboot(8), tapeboot(8), and 7Oboot(8). 


VAX 


See “Installation Boot Procedures” under either 11/780 ops(8) or 11/750 ops(8). These entries describe 
initial tape booting and modification of the console floppy disk to simplify UNIX system administration. 


C. Common to PDP-11 and VAX 


The tape boot loader will type “UNIX tape boot loader” on the console terminal and read in and execute 
the initial load program. The program will then type detailed instructions about the operation of the program 
on the console terminal. The program will ask what type of disk drive you have and which drive you plan to 
use for the copy. The disk controller used must be at the standard DEC address indicated by the program; how- 
ever, other disk controllers on your system may be at nonstandard addresses. A formatted, ECC flag-free pack 
must be mounted on the drive you have indicated. If necessary, use the appropriate DEC diagnostic program 
to format the pack. For the VAX use format(1M). Note that the pack will be written on. Next, the program 
will ask what type of tape drive you have and which drive contains the tape. Normally, this will be drive 0, but 
the program will work with other drives. Note that the tape is currently positioned correctly after the end-of-file 
between the initial load program and the root file system. When everything is ready, the program will copy the 
file system from the tape to disk and give instructions for booting the UNIX system. After the copy is complete 
and you have booted the basic version of the UNIX operating system, check [using fsek(1M)| the root filesystem 
and browse through it. 


PDP-11/70 Only 

The file /stand/mmtest is a stand-alone memory mapping diagnostic program for the PDP-11/70. If you 
are not absolutely sure that DEC FCO (field change order) M8140-R002 has been applied to your PDP-11/70 
CPU, stand/mmtest should be booted and allowed to run at least 20 minutes. To boot this program, go through 
the disk boot procedure, but specify: 


' 0=stand/mmtest 


Page 43 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


The UNIX system comes with optional power-fail recovery. This feature requires that the power-up and 
power-down interrupt vectors be 024. 


D. Update of Root 


It is very important that the system be running in single-user mode during the update phase. To update 
an already existing root file system, files three and four on Tape 1 will be used. It is necessary to first make 
a copy of the root file system using voleopy(1M) and then update this copy. The copy should be made on a sepa- 
rate disk pack using the same section number as the root file system (always section 0). Also, after the update 
is completed, check if any of the local administrative files in the directory /etc need modification. Most of these 
are mentioned in the part “ADMINISTRATIVE FILES”. 


Mount Tape 1 on drive 0 and position it at the load point. It is assumed that disk drive 1 is available for 
making the copy and that the root file system is on /dev/rp0. The following procedure will first make a copy 
of the root file system, and then update this copy. Note that /dev/mt4 refers to tape drive 0 but has the side 
effect of spacing forward to the next end-of-file (no rewind option). The —B option of epio specifies that input 
is in §120-byte records: 


voleopy root /dev/rrp0 pknamel /dev/rrp10 pkname2 
mount /dev/rp10 /bck 

# The 2 echoes will move the tape to file 3 
echo </dev/mt4 

echo </dev/mt4 

cp /dev/mt4 /bck/bin/cpio 

chmod 755 /bek/bin/epio 

chown bin /bek/bin/epio 

ed /bek 

/bek/bin/cpio —idmB </dev/rmt0 

cd / 

umount /dev/rp10 


Pknamel and pknamelI are the volume-‘names of the source and destination disk packs, respectively. If the new 
copy is satisfactory, shut down and halt the system, change disk packs, and reboot the system using the new 
root. 


E. Tape 2 (/usr) Format 


Tape 2 contains the /usr file system in epio format (5120-byte records). The /usr file system contains com- 
mands and files that must be available (mounted) when the system is in multiuser mode. The tape contains the 
following directories: 


adm: Miscellaneous administrative command and data files including the connect-time account- 
ing file wtmp and the process accounting file pacct. 


bin: Public commands; an overflow for /bin. 

dict: Dictionaries for word processing programs. 

games: Various demonstration and instructional programs. 

include: _ Public C language /inelude files. 

lib: : Archive libraries including the text processing macros; also contains data files for various 


programs such as spell(1) and cron(1M). 


Page 44 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


mail: Mail directory. 

lost+found: Directory used by fsck(1M) for disconnected files. 

news: Place for all the various system news; see news(1). 

pub: Handy public information, e.g., table of ASCII characters. 
spool: Spool directory for daemons. 

src: Source for commands, libraries, the system, etc. 

tmp: Directory for temporary files; should be cleaned at reboot. 


F. Initial Load of /usr 


Mount Tape 2 on drive 0 and position it at the load point. Mount a file system (device) as /usr. The ultimate 
size and location of this file system on a device is an administrative decision; initially, the following procedure 
will suffice: 


mkfs /dev/rrp1 65000 gap blocks 

# See mkfs(1M) for appropriate parameters. 

# Note that for RP03 disks, this will use part of section 2. 
labelit /dev/rrpl usr pkname 

mount /dev/rp1 /usr 

chmod 775 /usr 

cd /usr 

cpio —idmB </dev/rmt0 


Pkname is the volume name of the pack (e.g., “p0001”). 


Because /usr must be mounted when the system is in multiuser mode, the file /ete/re must be changed to 
include the command lines to mount and unmount the file systems in single user and multiuser mode. These 
lines must be inserted at the appropriate places in /etc/rcas indicated by comments in the prototype file. Next, 
the file /ete/checklist should be changed to include the file system device (e.g., /dev/rrp1); see fsck(1M), 
labelit(1M), mkfs(1M), mount(1M), and checklist(4). 


G. Update of /usr 


It is advisable that the system be running in singleuser mode during the update phase. It is also wise to 
first make a copy of your /usr file system for backup purposes. Next, mount Tape 2 on drive 0 and position it 
at the load point. The /usr file system must also be mounted. The following procedure will perform the update: 

cd /usr 
epio —idmB </dev/rmt0 


H. Initial Load or Update of Selectable Items 


The initial load and update procedures are essentially the same; the only exception being the creation of 
the selectable item directory on the initial load. 


Mount Tape 1 on drive 0 and position it at the load point. Make sure that the /usr file system is mounted. 
The following procedure will read in the source for each of the selectable subsystems. If a particular subsystem 
is not desired, simply skip that file on the tape by executing the following command: 


echo </dev/rmt4 


Page 45 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


The tape can be rewound after any subsystem by specifying /dev/rmt0 instead of /dev/rmt4. 


echo </dev/rmt4; echo < /dev/rmt4 
echo </dev/rmt4; echo </dev/rmt4 


ed /usr 

mkdir man; chown bin man; chgerp bin man; chmod 775 man 
ed man 

cpio —idmB </dev/rmt4 


ed /usr 

mkdir docs; chown bin docs; chgrp bin docs; chmod 775 docs 
cd does 

cpio —idmB </dev/rmt4 


ed /usr/sre/emd 

mkdir rje; chown bin rje; chgrp bin rje; chmod 775 rje 
ed rje 

cpio —idmB </dev/rmt4 


ed /usr/sre/cmd 

mkdir nusend; chown bin nusend; cherp bin nusend; chmod 775 nusend 
ed nusend 

cpio ~—idmB </dev/rmt4 


ed /usr/sre/emd 

mkdir graf; chown bin graf; chgrp bin graf; chmod 775 graf 
ed graf 

cpio —idmB </dev/rmt0 


After installing the source for the rje, nusend, and graphics subsystems, the software must be built and 
installed. (Execute the commands for the subsystems that you have elected to take.) 


To build and install rje, change your working directory to /usr/src and execute one of the following :mkemd 
lines: 


ARGS= "rjel" ./:mkemd rje # makes a single IBM system 

ARGS= "rje2" /:mkemd rje # makes rjel, and rje2 

ARGS= " rje3" /:mkemd rje # makes rjel, rje2, and rje3 & 
ARGS= " rje4 " /:mkemd rje # makes rjel, rje2, rje3, and rje4 


See rje(8) and the “UNIX System Remote Job Entry ” section for additional information. 
To build and install the NSC package: 


ed /usr/sre 


./:mkemd nusend SS 


To build and install the graphics package: 


ed /usr/sre 
/:mkemd graf & 


Page 46 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


CONFIGURATION PLANNING 
A. UNIX System Configuration 


The basic UNIX operating system supplied supports only the console, a disk controller (disk drive 0), and 
a tape controller (tape drive 0). Each system administrator must describe the actual configuration of their own 
system. 


All of the UNIX operating system source code and object libraries are in /usr/src/uts. All of the configura- 
tion information is kept in the directory /usr/src/uts/*/cf; the “*” represents either pdp11 or vax. There are 
only two files that must be changed to reflect your system configuration—/ow.s (univec.c on the VAX) and 
conf.c. The program config(1M) should be used to make these changes. 


Config requires a “system description file” and produces the two needed files. Table 4.A lists the values 
and sizes of the basic parameters for the different CPUs. For more details of syntax and structure, see 
config(1M) and the associated master(4). 


TABLE 4.A 


coe see 


3000 9000 


nswap 


buffers 25-60 80-4004 
sabufs 10-15 — 
hashbuf 32-128 32-128 
physbuf 3-5 3-7 
inodes 100-250 100-300 
iblocks 80-200 _ 
files 100-250 100-300 
mounts 8-16 8-20 
coremap 50-100 — 
swapmap 50-100 50-100 
calls 30-60 30-60 
procs 50-200 50-200 
texts 25-50 25-50 
clists 100-300 100-250 
maxproc 25 25 


+ Plus 512 bytes outside system space. 
£ Plus 1024 bytes allocated at start up. 


The first part of the system description file lists all of the hardware devices on the system. Next, various 
system information is listed. A brief explanation of this information follows: 


e root—Specifies the device where the root file system is to be found. The device must be a block device 
with read/write capability because this device will be mounted read/write as “/”. Thus, a tape can not 
be mounted as the root but can be mounted as some read-only file system. Normally, root is disk drive 
0, section 0. 


Page 47 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


pipe—Specifies where pipes are to be allocated (must be a mounted file system—the root file system 
is normally used). 


dump—Specifies the device to be used to dump memory after a system crash. Currently, only the TU10, 
TU16/TE16, TU78, and TS11 tape drives are supported for this purpose. 


swap—Specifies the device and blocks that will be used for swapping. Swplo is the first block number 
used and nswap indicates how many blocks, starting at swplo, to use. Care must be taken that the swap 
area specified does not overlap any file system. For example, if section 0 is 8000 blocks long, the root 
file system could occupy the first 6000 blocks, and swap the remaining 2000 by specifying: 


root rp06 0 
swap rp06 0 6000 2000 


buffers—Specifies how many “system buffers” to allocate. Real-time response improves as more buffers 
are allocated. UNIX system buffers form a “data cache”. Improvement in the hit rate of this cache tends 
to fall as the number of buffers is increased. 


sabufs—PDP-11 only: specifies how many “system addressable” buffers to allocate. One buffer is needed 
for every mounted file system. Certain I/O drivers need such buffers. 


hashbuf—Specifies how many hash buckets to allocate. These are used to search for a buffer given a 
device number and block number. This number must be a power of two. The default value is 64. 


physbuf—Specifies how many physical I/O buffer headers to allocate. One is needed for each physical 
read or write active. The default value is 4. 


inodes—Specifies how many “inode table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents a unique open 
inode. When the table overflows, the warning message “Inode table overflow” will be printed on the con- 
sole, The table size should be increased if this happens regularly. The number of entries used depends 
on the number of active processes, texts, and mounts. 


iblocks—PDP-11 only: specifies how many “inode block address cache” entries to allocate. An entry is 
needed for each regular, directory, or fifo file that is open. Since special files do not need an entry, data 
space can be conserved by specifying a much smaller number of iblocks than inodes, The default value 
is four less than the number of inodes. 


files—Specifies how many “open-file table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents an open file. When 
the table overflows, the warning message “no file” will be printed on the console. The table size should 
be increased if this happens regularly. 


mounts—Specifies how many “mount table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents a mounted file 
system. The root (/) will always be the first entry. When full, the mount(2) system call will return the 
error EBUSY. 


coremap—PDP-11 only: specifies how many entries to allocate to the “list of free memory” . Each entry 
represents a contiguous group of 64-byte blocks of free memory. When the list overflows, due to exces- 
sive fragmentation, the system will print a warning message on the console. This condition results in 
the loss of memory being freed. The system should be remade with a larger table size and rebooted. The 
number of entries used depends on the number of processes active, their sizes, and the amount of mem- 


‘ory available. 


Page 48 


swapmap—Specifies how many entries to allocate to the “list of free swap blocks”. Exactly like the 
coremap, except it represents free blocks in the swap area, in 512-byte units. 


6/82 


ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


calls—Specifies how many “call-out table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents a function to be 
invoked at a later time by the clock handler. The time unit is 1/60 of a second. The call-out table is used 
by the terminal handlers to provide terminal delays and by various other I/O handlers. When the table 
overflows, the system will crash and print the panic message “Timeout table overflow” on the console. 
This value must be greater than two. 


procs—Specifies how many “process table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents an active process. 
The scheduler is always the first entry and init(1M) is always the second entry. The number of entries 
depends on the number of terminal lines available and the number of processes spawned by each user. 
The average number of processes per user is in the range of 2 through 5. When full, the fork(2) system 
call will return the error EAGAIN. 


texts—Specifies how many “text table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents an active read-only 
text segment. Such programs are created by using the —i or —n option of the loader Id(1). The —n option 
is implicit on the VAX. When the table overflows, the warning message “out of text” is printed on the 
console, 

clists—Specifies how many “character list buffers” to allocate. On the PDP-11, each buffer contains up 
to 24 bytes; on the VAX, each buffer contains up to 64 bytes. The buffers are dynamically linked together 
to form input and output queues for the terminal lines and various other slow-speed devices. The aver- 
age number of buffers needed per terminal line is in the range of 5 through 10. When full, input charac- 
ters from terminals will be lost and not echoed. 

maxproc—Specifies how many concurrent processes a nonsuperuser is allowed to run. 
power—Specifies whether to attempt restart after a power failure. A value of 0 (default) indicates no 
restart; a value of 1 attempts power-fail restart. On restart, device drivers are called and process 1 (i.e., 
init) is sent a hangup signal; see init(1M). 


sema—Specifies whether to include semaphore code. A value of 0 (default) indicates no semaphores; a 
value of 1 includes semaphores. 


shmem—Specifies whether to include shared memory code. A value of 0 (default) indicates no shared 
memory; a value of 1 includes shared memory. 


mesg—Specifies whether to include message code. A value of 0 (default) indicates no messages; a value 
of 1 includes messages. 


shmmax—Specifies the maximum size of a shared memory segment. 

shmmin—Specifies the minimum size of a shared memory segment. 

shmmni—Specifies the maximum number of shared memory segments in the system. 
shmseg—Specifies the maximum number of shared memory segments a user may have attached. 


shmall—Specifies the maximum amount of shared memory that may be allocated system wide. The de- 
fault value is 512 clicks, 250k bytes. 


shmbrk—Spcecifies the number of clicks between the end of the data segment, and the beginning of the 
first shared memory segment if the default starting address is used allowing the user to continue to 
use sbrk(2) or brk(2). The default value is 16 clicks, 8k bytes. 


msgmax—Specifies the maximum message size. 


Page 49 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


msgmnb—Specifies the maximum number of bytes on any one queue, 


msgtq!l—Specifies the number of system message headers, i.e, maximum number of outstanding mes- 
sages. 


msgssz—Specifies the message segment size. Messages consist of a set of contiguous message segments 
large enough to fit the text. The segments are used to help eliminate fragmentation and speed message 
buffer allocation. A similar scheme was used in UNIX system release 4.0 on the PDP-11 and VAX where 
the maximum message size and segment size were identical. Here a message may span several segments. 


msgseg—Specifies the number of message segments in the system. 


msgmap—Specifies the message segment map size. 


msgmni—Specifies the maximum number of message queues system wide. The default is 10. & 


semmap—Specifies the number of entries in the semaphore map. The map is used by the system to allo- 
cate and free semaphore sets. This parameter should be changed to reflect changes in semmns. 


semmni—Specifies the number of semaphore identifiers, i.e., number of semaphore sets. 

sities = Spoetos the number of semaphores in the system. 

semmnu—Specifies the number of undo structures in the system. 

semume—Specifies the maximum number of undo entries per structure. 

semmsl—Specifies the maximum number of semaphores per semaphore identifier. & 
semopm--Specifies the maximum number of semaphore operations per semop(2) call. 


maus—PDP-11 only: specifies whether to include maus (shared memory) code. A value of 0 (default) 
indicates no shared memory; a value of 1 includes the shared memory code. 


x25bytes—Specifies the amount of external buffer space (in bytes) available to the X25 driver; on PDP- 
11s, this space is allocated outside of the kernel address space. The maximum allowable value for 
x25bytes on a PDP-11 is 65,535 (64K-1), 


x25bufs—Specifies the number of X25 buffer descriptors allocated. 


x25links—Specifies the number of X25 interfaces allocated. & 


B. UNIX System Generation 


Before generating the first UNIX system, the system administrator should modify the file called Makefile 
in the /usr/srce/uts/*/cf directory. This file contains five symbols that are used for system identification; it is 
used to initialize the internal utsname structure [see uname(1) and uname(2)|. The five symbols (which are 


eight characters maximum) are as follows: 

SYS System name (e.g., pwha); & 
NODE The name by which the system is known on the uuep(1C) network (e.g., pwha); 

REL The operating system release (e.g., 5.0); & 


Page 50 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


VER The current version of the system; this is usually four characters indicating when the sys- 
tem was made (e.g., 0620 for June 20); 


MACH The machine hardware name (e.g., vax-780). 


Generally, only the first two symbols need local modification; the REL symbol is a constant for the duration 
of this release, while the VER symbol will be defined when you make(1) the system. The name of the executable 
file produced by the generation procedure will be the concatenation of the SYS and VER symbols (e.g., 
pwhba0620). 


To generate a new UNIX operating system, follow the procedure given: 


ed /usr/sre/uts/*/cf 
ed dfile 
a 
[information as described above] 


Ww 

q 

config dfile 
make VER=ver 


The PDP-11 system has a relatively small address space. If the table sizes or the number of device types 
are too large, the program sysfix will print various error messages and the above procedure will only create 
an a.out file. In particular, the maximum available data space is 49,152 bytes. The actual data space requested 
can be found by using size(1) on a.out and adding the data and bss segment sizes. One then reduces the specified 
values for the various system entries until it all fits. The amount of space in the bss segment used for each entry 
is indicated in the part “UNIX System Configuration”. 


On the VAX, the combined data space should not exceed 200,000 bytes. 


The PDP-11 system is distributed with a special overlay loader that allows larger systems (text size greater 
than 64K) to be configured. This system will be made up of one main segment and seven overlay text segments 
that use supervisor registers to switch the overlay text segments. The main segment may be as large as 56K, 
and the overlay text segments may not be greater than 8K each. To invoke this new text scheme, edit 
/usr/src/uts/*/Makefile. To change the TYPE symbol from id to ov or when generating a new system, use the 
following procedure: 


ed /usr/src/uts/*/cef 
make VER=ver TYPE=ov 


The seven overlay text segments are described in the file /usr/sre/uts/pdp11/ck/SEGF. This file consists 
of two parts (as shown below). 


cat.o DR11C_O (First Part) 
Csi.0 CSI_O 
da.o DA11B_O 


Page 51 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE , ISSUE 1 6/82 


dmb.o dmr.o maus.o msg.o sem.o (Second Part) 
nsc.o kl.o sys.o vp.o . 

vpmt.o trace.o lp.o err.o main.o ht.o dn.o 

x25u.0 cat.o da.o du.o st1.o 

x25r.o0 nc.o st2.0 

x25s.0 x25m.o dmk.o pcl.o 

csi.o tm.o 


The first part associates object files with configurable devices. The second part describes a possible layout 
of the seven overlay text segments. Not all of the devices associated with the object files described in some of 
the overlay segments may be configured together because the overlay segment may become greater than 8K. 
If this happens, the second part of the file /usr/src/uts/pdp11/ct/SEGF will have to be modified. For example, 
the x25 driver and the pe/ driver may not be configured together since overlay segment six would be greater 
than 8K. To correct this, /usr/sre/uts/pdp11/cf/SEGF will have to be edited. For example, if the nse driver is 
not configured, the nsc.o file in overlay segment two may be replaced with pel.o. The pel.o file will have to be 
deleted from overlay segment six. The second part of /usr/src/uts/pdp11/ct/SEGF will then be as follows: 


dmb.o dmr.o maus.o msg.o sem.o 

pel.o kl.o sys.o vp.o 

vpmt.o trace.o |p.o err.o main.o ht.o dn.o 
x25u.0 cat.o da.o du.o stl.o 

x25r.o nc.o st2.o0 

x25s.0 x25m.o dmk.o 

csl.0 tm.o 


After completing this, make a new UNIX system. The text size of each object file may be found using size(1). 
The object files may be extracted using ar(1) from /usr/sre/uts/pdp11/libname where libname is the appropri- 
ate library. 


When you are satisfied with the new system, test it by the following procedure: 


ep /usr/sre/uts/*/sysver/ —_# sysver as above 
ed / 

umount /dev/rpl 

rm /unix 

In /sysver /unix 

sync 


Halt the processor and reboot the system. Note that this procedure results in two names for the operating 
system object the generic /unix and the actual name, say /pwba0620. An old system may be booted by referring 
to the actual name, but remember that many programs [such as ps(1)] use the generic name /unix to obtain 
the name-list of the system. 


If the new system does not work, verify that the correct device addresses and interrupt vectors have been 
specified. On the PDP-11, if the wrong interrupt vector and the correct device address have been specified for 
a device, the operating system will print the error message “stray interrupt at XXX” when the device is accessed, 
where XXX is the correct interrupt vector. On the VAX, the message is “stray UBA interrupt at XXX”. On the 
PDP-11, if the wrong device address is specified, the system will crash with a panic trap of type 0 (indicating 
a time-out) when the device is accessed. On the VAX, the system will not crash directly but will print a “UBA” 
warning message indicating the failing address. 


For the VAX, a stand-alone test may be executed to compare the configuration in /unix with the actual 
hardware. After the stand-alone shell prompts “$$”, type /stand/vef. The vef(1M) command reports on the 
MASSBUS adapter configuration and attempts to determine the UNIBUS system device configuration. Any er- 
rors should be corrected before continuing. 


Page 52 


6/82 


e C. Special Files 


ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE 


A special file must be made for every device on your system. Normally, all special files are located in the 
directory /deyv. Initially, this directory will contain: 


console 

Da error 
mem, kmem, null 
tty 
rp[0-7], rrp[0-7] 
rl[0-1], rrl[0-1] 
rk[0-1], rrk[0-1] 
mt0, rmt0 


ee mt4, rmt4 


console terminal 

see err(7) 

see mem(7) 

see tty(7) 

disk drive 0, sections 0-7 
disk drives 0 and 1 

disk drives 0 and 1 

tape drive 0 

tape drive 0 (no rewind). 


These special files are of two types—block and character. This is indicated by the character b or cin the 
listing produced by Is(1) with the —1 option. 


In addition, each special file has a major device number and a minor device number. The major device num- 
ber refers to the device type and is used as an index into either the bdevsw or cdevsw table in the configuration 
file conf.c. The minor device number refers to a particular unit of the device type and is used only by the driver 
for that type. The config program with the —t option will list major device numbers. 


The program mknod(1M) creates special files. For example, the following would create part of the initially- 


supplied /dev directory (on the PDP-11): 


ed /dev 
mknod console c 0 0 


mknod error c 20 0 

mknod mem ¢ 2 0; mknod kmem c 2 1; mknod null ¢ 2 2 
mknod tty ec 13 0 

mknod rp0 b 0 0; mknod rrp0 c 7 0 

mknod mt0 b 1 0; mknod rmt0 c 6 0 

mknod mt4 b 1 4; mknod rmt4 c 6 4 


After the special files have been made, their access modes should be changed to appropriate values by 
chmod(1). For example: 


ed /dev 

chmod 622 console 
chmod 444 error 
chmod 440 mem kmem 
chmod 666 null 

chmod 666 tty 

chmod 400 rp0 rrp0 
chmod 666 mt0 rmt0 
chmod 666 mt4 rmt4 


Page 53 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


Note that file names have no meaning to the operating system itself; only the major and minor device num- 
bers are important. However, many programs expect that a particular file is a certain device. Thus, by conven- 
tion, special files are named as follows: 


block device conf.c /dev 
RP03 disk rp rp* 
RP04/5/6 disk hp rp* 
RS03/4 fixed head disk hs ra 
RK05 disk rk rk* 
RKO1/2 disk rl rl* 
RMO05 disk hm rp* 
RM80 disk gd rp* 
RP07 disk gd rp* 
general disk gd rp* 
TU10 tape tm mt* 
TE/TU16 tape ht mt* 
TS11 tape ts mt* 
TU78 tape ts mt* 
general tape gt mt* 
character device conf.c /dev 
DL11 asyne. line kl tty*, console 
DHI11 asyne. line mux dh tty* 
DMC11 syne. unit dme dmc* 
DZ11 async. line mux dz tty* 
DN11 auto call unit dn dn* 
D11 syne. line du du* 
KMC11-B micro kmec kmc* 
DM11-BA modem control dmk dmk* 
DZ11/KMC11-B assist dzb tty* 
LP11 line printer Ip lp* 
RP03 disk rp rrp* 
RP04/5/6 disk hp rrp* 
RMO05 disk hm rrp* 
RM80 disk gt rrp* 
RPO7 disk gt rrp* 
general disk gd rrp* 
RS03/4 fixed head disk hs rrs* 
TU1O tape tm rmt* 
TE/TU16 tape ht rmt* 
TS11 tape ts rmt* 
TUT78 tape gt rmt* 
general tape gt rmt* 
error err error 
memory mm mem,kmem,null 
terminal sy tty 


te ta 


For those devices with a /devname ending in “*”, this character is replaced by a string of digits representing 


the minor device number. For example: 


mknod /dev/mtl b 11 
mknod /dev/rp24 b 0 024 # leading zero means octal 
mknod /dev/tty03 ¢ 13 


Page 54 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE 


Note that for disks, an octal number scheme is maintained because each drive is logically partitioned into eight 
sections. Thus, /dev/rp24 refers to section 4 of physical drive 2. There is also a special file, /dev/swap, that is 
used by the program ps(1). This file must reflect what block device is used for swapping and must be readable. 
For example: 


rm /dev/swap 
Re mknod /dev/swap b 0 0 
chmod 440 /dev/swap 
chown sys /dev/swap; chgrp sys /dev/swap 


The minor device numbers for tapes are also encoded; the minor device number consists of the four bits 
shown in Fig. 4.1. 


DENSITY O=REWIND DRIVE-SELECT DRIVE-SELECT 
SELECT 1=NO REWIND BIT 1 BIT 0 


Fig. 4.1 — Minor Device Number, Tape 


For the TU10 and TE16, the density select bit is 0 for 800 bpi and 1 for 1600 bpi. For the TU78, the density 
select bit is 0 for 1600 bpi and 1 for 6250 bpi. For the TS11, the density select bit is ignored; the density is always 
@ 1600 bpi. Therefore, the special file for tape drive 1, for operation at 1600-bpi, with no rewind on close would 
have a minor device number of 13 (binary 1101). The 2-bit drive number field permits a maximum of four drives 
per system. 


The minor numbers of the automatic calling unit (ACU) interface, DN11, are encoded in eight bits as shown 


in Fig. 4.2. 
SHARED-ACU-SELECT whietcs ob Fipieese Bagi trian 
FOUR BITS : Secs 
TWO BITS TWO BITS 
eo] Fig. 4.2 — Minor Device Number, DN11 


The shared-ACU-select field in normally zero, which indicates the standard 801 ACU hardware (one ACU, 
one phone line). For the new shared ACU hardware (one ACU, several phone lines), the shared-A CU-select field 
indicates which line is to be used. 


@ File Systems 


Each physical pack is partitioned into eight logical sections. This partitioning is defined in the operating 
system by a table with eight entries. Each table entry is two words long. The first specifies how many blocks 
are in the section; the second specifies the starting cylinder; see hp(7) (RP04/5/6), hm(7) (RM05), rp07(7) 

Oi: rm80(7) (RM80), and rp(7) (RP03) for default cylinder and block assignments. These values are de- 
scribed to the system in the header file /usr/inelude/sys/io.h. 


Page 55 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


A file system starts at block 0 of a section of the disk and may be as large as the size of that section; if it 
is smaller than the size of a section, the remainder of that section is unused. Note that the sections themselves Peg 
may overlap physical areas of the pack, but the file systems must never overlap. 


The program mkfs(1M) is used to initialize a section of the disk to be a file system. Next, the program 
labelit(1M) is used to label the file system with its name and the name of the pack. Finally, the file system 
may be checked for consistency by using fsck(1M). The file system may then be mounted using mount(1M). 


E. DZ11 Software with KMC11-B Assist 

KMC11-B microprocessors may be used to control DZ11 asynchronous multiplexers, thus off-loading termi- 
nal-oriented functions from the CPU. The KMC11-B does DMA input and output of data, character translations, 
tab expansions, etc. Each KMC11 can control up to four DZ11 multiplexers for a total of 832 asynchronous lines. 


Each system can support up to four KMC11 microprocessors; however, only 64 DZ11 lines can be controlled by 
KMC11 microprocessors. & 


Installation 


1. Generate a system by including each DZ11 to be controlled by a KMC11 in the system description file. 
For example: 


dzb X x 7, 


where X is the vector address, Yis the UNIBUS address, and Zis the bus request level. Also include the 
KMC11 microprocessors in the configuration file: 


kmell X Y Z 
2. Update /ete/re to execute dzbload for multiuser and power-fail init states. Each KMC11 used to control &S 
a DZ11 must be loaded with microcode. For each KMC11 used to control a DZ11, include 


/ete/dzbload /dev/kme? 
where ? is the minor device number of that KMC11. 
3. Special files must be created for each KMC11 and DZ11 line: 


/ete/mknod /dev/kme? Cc X ? 
/etc/mknod /dev/tty?? c N Zi 


where X is the major device number of the KMC11 and ? is the minor device number of the KMC11 con- — 
trolling the DZ11 multiplexers, i.e., the KMC11 loaded with microcode in Step 2. Y is the major device 
number of the dzbdevice as is supplied by config(1M). Z is the minor device number for a particular line 

on a DZ11. This number is composed of three fields. The low-order three bits are the line number relative 

to a DZ11. The next three bits contain the unit number of the DZ11 controlling these lines. Note that this 
number is the absolute DZ11 number, not the number relative to the KMC11. The high-order two bits 

are the minor device number of the KMC11 controlling this DZ11. For example: 


mknod /dev/tty?? ¢ Y 0241 a 


specifies the second line (0 through 7) on the fifth DZ11 to be controlled by the KMC11 with minor device 
number 2. The DZ11 number is specified by the order of appearance in the configuration file. The first 
four DZ11 multiplexers must be associated with one KMC11 and the next four must be associated with 
anothér KMC11. The order in which the KMC11 microprocessors are specified is not significant. & 


Page 56 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


F. Virtual Protocol Machine (VPM) Devices 


KMC11-B microprocessors may be used to control DMC11-DA, -FA, or -MD single-line synchronous commu- 
nications interfaces or DMS11-DA 8-line synchronous communications multiplexers (one per KMC). The combi- 
nation of a KMC11 and a DMS11-DA is known as a KMS11. The KMC11 executes the link-level communications 
protocol and performs DMA data transfers between main memory and the communications device. A link-level 
protocol description in a high-level language is compiled on the host computer [see vpme(1M)] and then down- 
loaded into the KMC11 by the vpmstart(1M) command. 


The common synchronous interface (CSI) contains a set of utility routines for communicating with the VPM 
interpreter in the KMC11. The VPM protocol driver provides a transparent user interface to the VPM interpret- 
er. The CSI routines are used not only by the VPM protocol driver but also by several other protocol drivers 
such as the BX.25 Level 3 driver. 


e Installation 


1. Generate a system. The system description file must contain a line of the form: 
vpm 0 0 0 n 
where nis the number of VPM protocol-driver minor devices desired, and a line of the form: 
csi 0 0 0 m 


where mis the number of CSI minor devices desired. One CSI minor device is required for each VPM pro- 
tocol-driver minor device. If other drivers that use CSI are configured, additional CSI minor devices must 
be configured to support these drivers. If the VPM trace capability |see vpm(7)| is to be used, the system 
description file must also contain a line of the form: 


trace 0 0 0 k 


where kis the number of trace minor devices desired (normally one). Vombsz, a configurable parameter 
which gives the size of the buffer pool available to vpm, may be adjusted to be different from the default 
value found in /etc/master. Refer to master(4) for more information. 


2. Compile the protocol script using vpme(1M): 
vpme [—m] [-i hdle[/kms]] —o seript.o script.r 


where script.r is the source file for the protocol description. The —m option is used only if the protocol 
source requires expansion with the m4(1) preprocessor; otherwise, the C preprocessor is used. The 
—i hdle option is used to compile a script that uses the bit-oriented (HDLC) version of the VPM inter- 
preter; otherwise, the character-oriented (BISYNC) version of the interpreter will be used. If the script 
is to be loaded into a KMS11 8-line multiplexer rather than into a KMC11 controlling a single-line inter- 
face, the —i hdle/kms option is needed. Only bit-oriented protocols are currently supported by VPM 
on the KMS11. 


3. Install the compiled protocol description in a convenient directory such as /lib and modify the /etc/re 
file to load the compiled protocol description into the selected KMC11s each time the system is rebooted 
(first transition to multiuser) using vpmstart(1M). If power-fail recovery is desired, the /etc/re file 
should also be modified to reload the compiled protocol description into the selected KMC after a power 
‘fail occurs. The —r option to vpmstart is required when reloading the KMC after a power fail. 


Page 57 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


4, Special files must be created for each VPM protocol-driver minor device, each trace minor device, and 
each KMC11: 


/ete/mknod /dev/kme? c xX ve 
/ete/mknod /dev/vpm? € iy ? 
/ete/mknod /dev/trace c iz 0 


where X, Y, and Zare the major device numbers of the KMC11 driver, VPM protocol driver, and trace 
driver, respectively. (It is not necessary to make special files for the CSI minor devices since these are 
never referenced explicitly). 


5. Modify the /ete/re file so that it executes a vpmset(1M) command for each VPM protocol-driver minor 
device. The arguments to the vpmset command specify the protocol-driver minor device, the KMC11, 
and, if the device is a KMS11, the particular line on the KMS11: 


= /ete/vpmset /dev/vpm? /dev/kmc? [n] 


KMC11 lines are numbered starting with zero. The vypmset commands should be executed on the first 
transition to multiuser. An attempt to open a VPM protocol-driver minor device for reading and/or writ- 
ing will fail if the corresponding vpmset command has not yet been executed. 


Hardware Installation and Switch Settings 


The KMC11-B microprocessor and DMC11-DA, -FA, or -MD line unit must be installed in adjacent slots of 
a PDP-11 or VAX backplane. Care should be taken not to exceed the de power capacity of the cabinet in which 
the items are installed. The microprocessor and line unit are interconnected by a 1-foot ribbon cable. The 
DMC11-DA or -FA line unit is connected to a suitable synchronous modem by a DEC-supplied modem cable. 
If the HDLC interpreter is used, the modem must be optioned for full-duplex (4-wire) operation; at speeds above 
1200 bits per second, this will normally require a private line. The DMC11-DA has an RS-282 interface that is 
suitable for connection to data sets such as the 208 and 209. The DMC11-FA has a CCITT V.35 interface. The 
DMC11-MD has an integral 56KB modem; this unit must be connected by a pair of coaxial cables to another 
DMC11-MD. The device address and interrupt vector address switches on the KMC11 should be set for the se- 
lected addresses. The KMC11 should also be wired for the selected bus priority (normally 5). All switches and 
jumpers on the DMC11 line unit should be in the normal configuration prescribed by the relevant DEC mainte- 
nance manual, but with one exception—the NO CRC switch (switch 52 in switch pack number 1) should be in 
the ON position. The purpose of this switch setting is to inhibit hardware CRC generation. Hardware CRC gen- 
eration is not used with the VPM software for this device. 


The procedures for installing a KMS11 are similar except that: 
1. There are no switches to.set on the DMS11-DA 8-line multiplexer. 


2. Modem cables are not supplied with the DMS11-DA. Instead, there is an $-line distribution panel with 
an RS-232 connector for each line on the DMS11-DA. Each in-use line must be connected by a suitable 
cable to a synchronous modem. The modem must be optioned for full-duplex (4-wire) operation. The 
modem should also be optioned to hold the transmitter carrier continuously on because the request-to- 
send lead to the modem is not controlled by the VPM software for the KMS11. The DM11-BA modem con- 
trol multiplexer normally included as part of the KMS11 hardware package is not currently used by the 
VPM software for the KMS11. Limited access to the DM11-BA modem control unit is provided by a sepa- 
rate driver [see dmk(7)]. If the modem cannot be optioned for continuous carrier, the dmk driver can 
be used to turn on the request-to-send lead to the modem. For dial-up lines (e.g., a 212 data set operating 
in synchronous mode), it may be necessary to use the dmk driver to turn on the data-terminal ready lead 
‘to the modem. 


The KMC11 contains a hardware timer which is used by both the VPM and DZ11/KMC11 software. For 
proper operation with this software, the value of the hardware timer should be 75 microseconds. Newer versions 


Page 58 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


of the KMC11 microprocessor (etch revisions E and later) contain a switch pack at location E82 which is used 
to select the value of the program timer. :E82-8 ON provides a time-out value of 115 milliseconds; E82-8 OFF 
yields the correct value of 75 microseconds. (E82 1 through 7 are not used). On earlier versions of the KMC11, 
the time-out value is selected by installing the proper value of capacitor C40. For proper operation with VPM 
and DZ11/KMC11 software, the value of this capacitor should be 4700 pF. 


G. X25 Devices 


The X25 driver provides multiplexed channels (“permanent virtual circuits”, also known as PVCs) over one 
or more synchronous communication lines using the Bell System standard BX.25 Level 3 communication proto- 
col. Each X25 minor device can be associated with an arbitrary logical channel number (1 through 4095) on any 
one of some configurable number of multiplexed communication lines. A separate BX.25 Level 3 interface (link) 
is provided for each physical communication line. 


The X25 driver uses the (CSI) to access communication lines controlled by KMC11-B microprocessors. Level 
2 of BX.25 (the link level) is implemented by a VPM protocol script in the KMC11. ° 


Installation 
1. Generate a system. The system description file must contain a line of the form: 
x25 0 0 0 n 
where nis the number of X25 minor devices desired. One X25 minor device is required for each virtual 
circuit. The description file must also contain a line for the nc (network control) driver, which is used 
to install, monitor, and control permanent virtual circuits. This line has the following form: 


ne 0 0 0 1 


If more than one synchronous communication line is to be accessed via the X25 driver, the description 
file must also contain a line of the form: 


x25links m 


where mis the number of synchronous lines (and thus the number of X25 interfaces) to be accessed via 
the X25 driver. The CSI driver must also be configured. One CSI minor device is required for each X25 
link. This is in addition to the CSI minor devices required to support other applications of VPM. If the 
X25 trace capability is to be used, the VPM trace driver must also be configured. 


2. Modify the /ete/re file to load the compiled protocol description into the selected KMCs each time the 
system is rebooted (first transition to multiuser) using vpmstart(1M): 


/ete/vpmstart /dev/kme? 6 /lib/eslapb.o 


If a KMS11 (a KMC11-B with an 8-line multiplexer) is to be used instead of a KMC11-B with a single-line 
interface, the line should be: 


/ete/vpmstart /dev/kmc? 6 /lib/eslapb.kms 
If power-fail recovery is desired, the /etc/rc file should also be modified to reload the compiled protocol 


‘description into the selected KMCs after a power fail occurs. The —r option to vpmstart is required when 
reloading the KMC after a power fail. 


Page 59 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


3. Special files must be created for each X25 minor device and each KMC11: 


/ete/mknod /dev/x25/s? c xX i 
/ete/mknod /dev/kmc? c a's ? 


where X and Yare the major device numbers of the X25 driver and KMC11 driver, respectively. There 
must also be a node for the ne driver: 


/etc/mknod /dev/ne c Z 0 


where Z is the major device number of the ne driver. If KMS modem control is required, there must also 
be a node for each DM11-BA modem control multiplexer: 


/ete/mknod /dev/dmk? c W ? 


where Wis the major device number of the dmk driver. 


4. Modify the /etc/re file so that it executes x25pve(1M) to associate each X25 minor device with a particu- 
lar link and logical channel number and x25Ink(1M) to associate each link with a particular line on a 
particular KMC11 microprocessor and to start the protocol. The /ete/re file should contain a line of the 
form: 


/etce/x25pve —i —S —m /dev/x25/s? —e chno —] linkno 


for each X25 minor device, where chno is the logical channel number and linkno is the X25 link number. 
There should also be a line of the form: 


/ete/x25lnk —a —m /dev/kme? —n lineno —1 linkno 
/ete/x25Ink —i —] linkno 


Links and lines are numbered starting with zero. The arguments to the first x25Ink command specify 
the X25 link number, the KMC11, and the particular line if the KMC11 has more than one line. The second 
x25Ilnk command starts the protocol running on the X25 link specified. When a link is started, the —b 
option of the x25lnk command should be used if this end of the link is using address B for the level 2 
protocol. It is recommended that the x25pve commands precede the x25Ink commands in the /ete/re 
file. The x25Ink and x25pve commands should be executed on the first transition to multiuser. An at- 
tempt to open an X25 minor device will fail if the corresponding x25lnk and x25pve commands have 
not yet been executed. 


There are several other configuration parameters associated with the X25 driver: x25bytes, and x25bufs; 
these are described in the part “UNIX System Configuration”. The default values for these parameters are ade- 
quate for 16 minor devices. If substantially more or less than that number of minor devices is configured, it may 
be desirable to adjust these values. 


A simple formula may be used to calculate an approximation of the maximum number of buffer descriptors 
that will ever be used: 


(4 * number_x25links) + (8 * number_x25minor_devices) 


If your system is low on kernel data space, it would be wise to calculate this number and decrease x25bufs if 
possible. 


A formula may also be used to calculate an approximation of the maximum amount of X25 buffer space 
needed. This value depends on the packet size to be used on each link. For each link, add the following values: 


4 * packetsize 
8 * packetsize * number_x25minor_devices_on_that_link & 


Page 60 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


Then add the values for all the links. If the amounts configured are too small, requests for a buffer descriptor 
and buffer will be denied until the space is. freed. User writes will block and a decrease in throughput will proba- 
bly be noticeable. 


The number of buffer descriptors and the amount of buffer space in use at any one time depend on the appli- 
cations running X25 and the activity on each link. Usually, it will not be necessary to configure the maximum 
values. 


H. STC and $T—Synchronous Terminal Interface 


The synchronous terminal controller and synchronous terminal drivers provide access to ASCII binary syn- 
chronous protocol compatible terminals (Model 4540 of the Teletype Corporation) and printers over one or more 
synchronous communications line. These drivers use VPM to access communications lines controlled by 
KMC11-B microprocessors. Each communications line can support one cluster controller connected to any com- 
bination of up to 32 devices (i.¢e., terminals and printers). 


Installation 
The STC driver is a pseudo-device driver that performs hardware assignment, communications line enable 
and disable operations, and printer device assignments for each synchronous terminal communications line. The 
STC interfaces are installed as follows: 
1. An entry must be placed in the system description file 
ste 0 0 0 N 
where Nis the number of synchronous terminal communications lines. 
2. A special file must be created in the /dev directory for each line. The files should be named /dev/stX, 
where X is the minor device number. These numbers range from 0 through N—-1, where Nis the number 


of synchronous terminal communications lines. 


3. Modify the /etc/stload file so that it starts the appropriate lines on the appropriate devices for your sys- 
tem. As distributed, /etc/stload starts one line on KMC11-B device 0. 


4. Modify the /etc/rc file so that it executes the stload command at system reboot time. If power-fail recov- 
ery is desired, /etc/rc should also be modified to execute stload with the —r option after power failure. 


5. Modify the /etc/shutdown file to disable all synchronous terminal communications lines. For example, 
the commands 


/etc/stentrl /dev/st0 off 
/ete/vpmset —d /dev/st0 


will disable line 0. 


The ST driver is a pseudo-device driver that performs terminal device assignments and handles the user 
interface to synchronous terminal and printer devices. The ST interfaces are installed as follows: 


1. An entry must be placed in the system description file 


st 0 0 0 N 


Page 61 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


where Nis the maximum number of synchronous devices that can be connected to your system at one 
time. 


2. A special file must be created in the /dev directory for each printer device. The files should be named 
/dev/spX, where Xis the same as the minor device number. The minor device numbers for printer devices 
range from 0 through STNPRNT-1, where STNPRNT is a system parameter specifying the number of 
printer devices. 


3. A special file must be created in the /dev directory for each terminal device. The files are usually named 
/dev/ttyZZ, where ZZ is a name that does not conflict with any asynchronous tty line names. The minor 
device numbers for these devices range from STNPRNT through N-1, where Nis the number of synchro- 
nous devices as specified above. 


There are several other configuration parameters associated with the synchronous terminal drivers: 


stnprnt Specifies how many of the synchronous terminal and printer devices specified in the sys- 
tem description file are printers. The default value for stnprntis one fourth of the synchro- 
nous terminal and printer devices. If stnprnt is larger than the number of synchronous 
devices in your system, a warning message will be printed and stnprnt will be reduced to 
the default value. 


stibsz Specifies the size of the input buffer pool for synchronous terminals and printers in bytes. 
Stibsz should be a multiple of 256 because input buffers are always allocated in 256 byte 
chunks. For each synchronous terminal communications line, four input buffers are allo- 
cated to receive incoming messages. The buffer will be freed when all of the data in the 
message has been processed by a user. The default buffer size of 8192 bytes provides 32 
input buffers. If no input buffers are available for an incoming message, the message will 
wait at the sending device until a buffer is freed and can be allocated for the sending device. 


stobsz Specifies the size of the output buffer pool for synchronous terminals and printers in bytes. 
Output buffers are allocated as needed to send data to synchronous devices. For devices 
working in line mode, almost all buffers will be allocated with a size of 256 bytes. In appli- 
cation mode, buffers are allocated for each write system call at the exact requested size. 
The default buffer size is 8192. The buffer size needed on your system will be governed by 
the type and frequency of usage of synchronous devices. If enough buffer space is not avail- 
able when it is requested, the writing process will be suspended until space is available. 


stihbuf Specifies how many buffer headers to allocate for synchronous terminal input buffers. A 
buffer header is needed for each input buffer from the time it becomes available until it 
is freed when all of the data in the buffer has been processed. If you override the default 
value of four buffer headers per synchronous device, the total number of buffer headers 
to allocate for all synchronous devices must be specified. If too few buffer headers are allo- 
cated, requests for input buffers will roadblock waiting for free headers. 


stohbuf Specifies how many buffer headers to allocate for synchronous terminal output 
buffers. A buffer header is needed for each output buffer from the time the buffer is 
filled and sent to the transmitter until receipt of the buffer is positively acknowledged or 
the buffer is discarded as unsendable. If you override the default value of four buffer head- 
ers per synchronous device, specify the total number of buffer headers to allocate for all 
sychronous devices. If too few buffers are allocated, request for output buffers will road- 
block waiting for free headers. 


Page 62 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


ADMINISTRATIVE FILES 
A. /etc/motd 


This file contains the message-of-the-day. It is printed by /etc/profile after every successful login; there- 
fore, it should be kept short and to the point. 


B. /ete/re 

On the transition between init states, /etc/init invokes /bin/sh to run /etc/rc (must have executable modes). 
So that /ete/re can properly handle the removal of temporary files and the mounting and unmounting of file 
systems, it is invoked with three arguments—new state, number of times this state has been entered, and previ- 
ous state. When the system is initially booted, /ete/re is invoked with arguments “1 0 0”; when state two 
(multiuser) is subsequently entered, the arguments are “2 0 1”. 

When state 2 is entered more than once (via another /etc/init 2), no action will be taken by this file. This 


enables the system administrator to add or delete login processes while the system is in multiuser mode (see 
/etc/inittab). 


eo? 


When the init process is sent a hangup or a power-fail signal, it will invoke /etc/re with an “x appended 
to the first argument (e.g., “2x 1 2”). 


Daemons may be invoked by /etc/rc, by including lines for them in /ete/inittab, or by /usr/lib/crontab. 
These files must be edited to suit local conditions; see init(§). 
C. /etc¢/inittab 
This file indicates to /ete/init which processes to create or terminate in each init state. By convention, state 
6 is singleuser and state 2 is multiuser. For example, the following line creates a sample single-user environ- 


ment: 


s6:6:wait:(uname;echo 1 user w/o gettys running;) > /dev/console 2>&1 
co: :respawn:/etc/getty console console 


This indicates that for state 6 a process that produces the system name followed by the “single user” message 
is created. Following this process a shell will be executed. 


For line /dev/tty00 for use by 300/150/110 baud asynchronous terminals, add the following line: 
00:2:respawn:/ete/getty tty00 300 
For line /dev/tty99 for use by a synchronous terminal, add the following line: 
99:2:respawn:/etc/stgetty tty99 1200 
The arguments to getty are the number of seconds to allow before hanging up the line, the device name, 
optional speed settings which refers to an entry in /etc/gettydefs, optional type of terminal referenced in 


getty(1M), and optional line discipline. 


Again, this file must be edited for local conditions; see getty(8), stgetty(8), init(’), gettydefs(4), and 
inittab(5). 


Page 63 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


D. 


This file is used to describe each user to the system. A new line must be added for each new user. Each line 


/ete/passwd 


has seven fields separated by colons: 


1. 


Login name: normally 1 through 6 characters, first character alphabetic, the remainder alphanumeric, 
no uppercase characters. 


. Enerypted password: initially null, filled in by passwd(1). The encrypted password contains 13 bytes 


while the actual password is limited to a maximum of 8 bytes. The encrypted password may be followed 
by a comma and up to four more bytes of password “age” information. 


. User ID: a number between 0 and 65,535; 0 indicates the superuser. User IDs 0 through 99 are reserved. 
. Group ID: the default is group 1 (one). Group IDs 0 through 99 are reserved. 


. Accounting information: this field is used by various accounting programs. It usually contains the user 


name, department number, and account number. 


. Login directory: full pathname (keep them reasonably short). 


. Program name: if null, /bin/sh is invoked after a successful login. If present, the named program is in- 


voked in place of /bin/sh. 


For example: 


ghh::138:1:6824-G.H.Hurtz(4357):/usr/ghh: 
grk::244:1:6510-5.P.LeName(4466):/usr/grk:/bin/rsh 


See also passwd(4), login(1), and passwd(1). 


E. /etc/group 


This file is used to describe each group to the system. The system administrator must add a new line for 
each new group. Each line has four fields separated by colons: 


. Group name: normally 1 through 6 characters, first character alphabetic, rest alphanumeric, no upper- 


case characters. 


. Encrypted password: contains 13 bytes while the actual password is limited to a maximum of 8 bytes. 
. Group ID: a number between 0 and 65,535. Group IDs 0 through 99 are reserved. 


. Login names: list of all Jogin names in the group, separated by commas; list of all Jogin names that may 


use newgrp(1) to become a member of the group. 


Group passwords are strongly discouraged. See also group(4). 


F. /etc/profile 


When the shell is executed and is the leader of a process group, as is the case when it is invoked by Jogin, 
it will read and execute the commands in /etc/profile before executing commands in the user’s .profile file. This 
allows the system administrator to set up a standard environment for all users (e.g., executing umask, setting 


Page 64 


6/82 ; ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


shell variables, etc.) and take care of other housekeeping details (such as news —n). Note that in /etc/profile 
the shell variable $0 indicates the invocation—normal shell (—sh), restricted shell (—rsh), or su command 
(-su). 


G. /etc/checklist 
This file contains a list of default devices to be checked for consistency by the fsck(1M) program. The de- 
vices normally correspond to those mounted when the system is in multiuser mode. For example, a sample 


checklist would be: 


/dev/rp0 
/dev/rrpl 


Note that the root device is specified as a block device while all others are specified as character devices. 
Character devices can be checked faster than block devices. The root device is specified as a block device in order 
for the fsck program to detect when the root is being checked, so that any modifications to this file system will 
result in an immediate reboot request. 


H. /etc/shutdown 


This file contains procedures to gracefully shut down the system in preparation for file save or scheduled 
downtime. 


|. /ete/filesave and /etc/tapesave 

These files contain prototypes for local file saves. 
J. /usr/adm/pacct 

This file contains the process accounting information; see acct(1M). 
K. /usr/adm/wtmp 

This file is the log of login processes. 
REGENERATING SYSTEM SOFTWARE 

System source is issued under the directory /usr/src. The subdirectories are named cmd (commands), lib 
(libraries), uts (the operating system), head (header files), and stand (stand-alone programs); see mk(8) for de- 
tails on how to remake system software. 

A couple of anomalies: the accounting routine that deals with holidays and the prime/nonprime time split 
must be recompiled at the end of each year (it is currently correct for BTL-New Jersey in 1981). The file is 
/usr/sre/emd/acct/lib/pnpsplit.c. A reminder is sent to /usr/adm/acct/nite/log, the standard place for such 


messages, starting a week before year-end and continuing until pnpsplit.cis recompiled; see “THE UNIX SYS- 
TEM ACCOUNTING” section for details. 


Page 65 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


NOTES 


Page 66 


