UNIX SHELL TUTORIAL 


mRHHHHeHHHHHeHHeHHHH He FE 
ee ee mes | 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION ce osc. eee ec a sr ma SE eS Pact ie Sa eel eee l 


2. OVERVIEW OF THE UNIX ENVIRONMENT ~— 0 0.2 Se a a es 1 
2.1 File System 1 
2.2 UNIX Processes 2 


3 SHEL be PADI Oy ast se Sen ee eee ae ee en ee 3 
3.1 Commands 3 
3.2 How the Shell Finds Commands 4 
3.3 Generation of Argument Lists 4 
3.4 Shell Variables 5 
3.4.1 Positional Parameters. 5 
3.4.2 User-defined Variables. 5 
3.4.3 Command Substitution. 7 
3.4.4 Predefined Special Variables. 8 
3.5 Quoting Mechanisms 9 
3.6 Redirection of Input and Output 9 
3.6.1 Standard Input and Standard Output. 9 
3.6.2 Diagnostic and Other Outputs. 10 
3.7 Command Lines and Pipelines 10 
3.8 Examples 10 
3.9 Changing the State of the Shell and the .profile File 11 
SAF Come coo ra | 
319.2 The...profile File. 11 
3.9.3 Execution Flags: set. 12 


4. USING THE SHELL AS A COMMAND: SHELL PROCEDURES ........ 12 
A Command’s Environment 12 

.2 Invoking the Shell 13 

4.3 Passing Arguments to the Shell; shift 13 

4.4 Control Commands 14 

4.4.1 Structured Conditional: if. 16 

4.4.2 Multi-way Branch: case. 16 

4.4.3 Conditional Looping: while and until. 17 

4.4.4 Looping over a List: for. 17 

4.4.5 Loop Control: breakand continue. 18 

4.4.6 End-of-file and exit. 18 

4.4.7 Command Grouping: Parentheses and Braces. 18 

4.4.8 Input/Output Redirection and Control Commands. 19 

4.4.9 In-line Input Documents. 19 

4.4.10 Transfer to Another File and Back: the Dot (.) Command. 20 
4.4.11 Interrupt Handling: trap. 20 

4.5 Special Shell Commands 21 

4.6 Creation and Organization of Shell Procedures 23 

4.7 More about Execution Flags 23 


5. MISCELLANEOUS SUPPORTING COMMANDS AND FEATURES ....... 24 
5.1 Conditional Evaluation: test 24 
5.2 Reading a Line: line 25 
5.3 Simple Output: echo 25 
5.4 Expression Evaluation: expr 25 
5.5 trueand false 25 
5.6 Input/Output Redirection Using File Descriptors. 25 


nRromainmRteHeH HHH HHeE FE HE SE EE & & 
ft 
N= 


5.7 Conditional Substitution 26 
5.8 Invocation Flags 27 


6c EXAMPEES- OPCs HeELD PROCEDURES <3. (520. eee 2. aes ees, 28 
copypairs: 28 
copyto: 28 
distinct: 28 
draft: 29 
edfind: 29 
edlast: 29 
fsplit: 30 
initvars: 30 
merge: 31 
mkfiles: 31 
mmt: 32 
null: 32 
phone: 33 
writemail: 33 


7. EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT SHELL PROGRAMMING ............ 33 
7.1 Overall Approach 33 
7.2 Approximate Measures of Resource Consumption 33 
7.2.1. Number of Processes Generated. 33 
7.2.2 Number of Data Bytes Accessed. 34 
7.2.3 Directory Searches. 35 
7.3 Efficient Organization 35 
7.3.1 Directory-Search Order and the PATH Variable. 35 
7.3.2 Good Ways to Set up Directories. 35 


PV ONO CA cS Los lt Se MG RS a RS nee SoA eRe eee ee a sare 35 
NACH Col 21) afoSe TG eS ae een) 8” cee ap aaa Ge 36 


=fi:= 


nH HRH He He HEHE HeEeeeHe HE HE HE 


1189 UNIX 
B.4.1 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 


G. A. Snyder 
J. R. Mashey 


Bell Laboratories 
Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974 


1. INTRODUCTION 


In any programming project, some effort is used to build the end product. The remainder is 
consumed in building the supporting tools and procedures used to manage and maintain that 
end product. The second effort can far exceed the first, especially in larger projects. A good 
command language can be an invaluable tool in such situations. If it is a flexible programming 
language, it can be used to solve many internal support problems without requiring compilable 
programs to be written, debugged, and maintained; its most important advantage is the ability 
to get the job done now. For a perspective on the motivations for using a command language 
in this way, see [1,4,5,6]. 


When users log into a UNIX¢ system, they communicate with an instance of the shell that reads 
commands typed at the terminal and arranges for their execution. Thus, the shell’s most 
important function is to provide a good interface for human beings. In addition, a sequence of 
commands may be preserved for repeated use by saving it in a file, called a shell procedure, a 
command file, or a runcom, according to local preference. 


Some UNIX users need little knowledge of the shell to do their work; others make heavy use of 
its programming features. This tutorial may be read in several different ways, depending on the 
reader’s interests. A brief discussion of the UNIX environment is found in §2. The discussion 
in §3 covers aspects of the shell that are important for everyone, while all of §4 and most of §5 
are mainly of interest to those who write shell procedures. A group of annotated shell pro- 
cedure examples is given in §6. Finally, a brief discussion of efficiency is offered in §7; this is 
found in its proper place (at the end), and is intended for those who write especially time- 
consuming shell procedures. 


Complete beginners should not be reading this tutorial, but should work their way through 
other available tutorials first. See [14] for an appropriate plan of study. All the commands men- 
tioned below are described in Section 1 of the UNIX User’s Manual [7], while system calls are 
described in Section 2 and subroutines in Section 3 thereof; references of the form name(N) 
point to entry name in Section N of that manual. 


2. OVERVIEW OF THE UNIX ENVIRONMENT 


Full understanding of what follows depends on familiarity with UNIX; [13] is useful for that, 
and it would be helpful to read [8] and at least one of [9,10]. For completeness, a short over- 
view of the most relevant concepts is given below. 


2.1 File System 


The UNIX file system’s overall structure is that of a rooted tree composed of directories and 
other files. A simple file name is a sequence of characters other than a slash (/). A path name 
is a sequence of directory names followed by a simple file name, each separated from the previ- 


- ous one by a /. If a path name begins with a /, the search for the file begins at the root of the 


entire tree; otherwise, it begins at the user’s current directory (also known as the working direc- 
tory). The first kind of name is often called a full (or absolute) path name because it is invariant 


+ UNIX is a trademark of Bell Laboratories. 


2 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


with regard to the user’s current directory. The latter is often called a relative path name, 
because it specifies a path relative to the current directory. The user may change the current 
directory at any time by using the cd command. In most cases, a file name and its correspond- 
ing path name may be used interchangeably. Some sample names are: 


/ absolute path name of the root directory of the entire file structure. 
/bin directory containing most of the frequently used public commands. 


/ai1/tf£/jtb/bin a full path name typical of multi-person programming projects. This 
one happens to be a private directory of commands belonging to per- 
son jtb in project tf; a1 is the name of a file system. 


bin/x a relative path name; it names file x in subdirectory bin of the 
current directory. If the current directory is /, it names /bin/x. If, 
on the other hand, the current directory is /a1/tf£/jtb, it names 
/ail/tt/jtb/bin/x. 


memox name of a file in the current directory. 


The UNIX file system provides special shorthand notations for the current directory and the 
parent directory of the current directory: 


is the generic name of the current directory; ./memox names the same file as 
memox if such a file exists in the current directory. 


is the generic name of the parent directory of the current directory; if you type: 
cd 


then the parent directory of your current working directory will become your new 
current directory. 


2.2 UNIX Processes 
wa Beginners should skip this section on first reading. 


An image is a computer execution environment, including contents of memory, register values, 
name of the current directory, status of open files, information recorded at login time, and vari- 
ous other items. A process is the execution of an image; most UNIX commands execute as 
separate processes. One process may spawn another using the fork system call, which dupli- 
cates the image of the original (parent) process. The new (child) process continues to execute 
the same program as the parent. The two images are identical, except that each program can 
determine whether it is executing as parent or child. Each program may continue execution of 
the image or may abandon it by issuing an exec system call, thus initiating execution of 
another program. In any case, each process is free to proceed in parallel with the other, 
although the parent most commonly issues a wait system call to suspend execution until a 
child terminates (exits). 


Figure 1 illustrates these ideas. Program A is executing (as process 1) and wishes to run 
program B. \t forks and spawns a child (process 2) that continues to run program A. The child 
abandons A by execing B, while the parent goes to sleep until the child exits. 


A child inherits its parent’s open files. This mechanism permits processes to share common 
input streams in various ways. In particular, an open file possesses a pointer that indicates a 
position in the file and is modified by various operations on the file; read and write system 
- calls copy a requested number of bytes from and to a file, beginning at the position given by 
the current value of the pointer. As a side effect, the pointer is incremented by the number of 
bytes transferred, yielding the effect of sequential I/O; 1seek can be used to obtain random- 
access I/O; it sets the pointer to an absolute position within the file, or to a position offset 
either from the end of the file or from the current pointer position. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 3 


PROGRAM A 
PROCESS 1 p--------- -------- 


PROGRAM A PROGRAM B 


PROCESS 2 
EXIT 


Figure | 


When a process terminates, it can set an eight-bit exit status (see $? in §3.4.4) that is available 
to its parent. This code is usually used to indicate success (zero) or failure (non-zero). 


Signals indicate the occurrence of events that may have some impact on a process. A signal 
may be sent to a process by another process, from the terminal, or by UNIX itself. A child pro- 
cess inherits its parent’s signals. For most signals, a process can arrange to be terminated on 
receipt of a signal, to ignore it completely, or to catch it and take appropriate action, as 
described in §4.4.11. For example, an INTERRUPT signal may be sent by depressing an 
appropriate key (del, break, or rubout). The action taken depends on the requirements of the 
specific program being executed: 


e The shell invokes most commands in such a way that they immediately die when an 
interrupt is received. For example, the pr (print) command normally dies, allowing the 
user to terminate unwanted output. 


e The shell itself ignores interrupts when reading from the terminal, because it should con- 
tinue execution even when the user terminates a command like pr. 


e The editor ed chooses to catch interrupts so that it can halt its current action (especially 
printing) without allowing itself to be terminated. 


3. SHELL BASICS 


The shell (i.c., the sh command) implements the command language visible to most UNIX 
users. It reads input from a terminal or a file and arranges for the execution of the requested 
commands. It is a program written in the C language [11]; it is mot part of the operating sys- 
tem, but is an ordinary user program. The discussion below is adapted from [2,3,7,12]. 


3.1 Commands 


A simple command is a sequence of non-blank arguments separated by blanks or tabs. The first 
argument (numbered zero) usually specifies the name of the command to be executed; any 
Temaining arguments, with a few exceptions, are passed as arguments to that command. A 
command may be as simple as: 


who 


which prints the login names of users who are currently logged into the system. The following 


. line requests the pr command to print files a, b, and c: 


pr a be 


4 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


If the first argument of a command names a file that is executable! and is actually a compiled 
program, the shell (as parent) spawns a new (child) process that immediately executes that pro- 
gram. If the file is marked as being executable, but is not a compiled program, it is assumed to 
be a shell procedure, i.e., a file of ordinary text containing shell command lines, as well as pos- 
sibly lines meant to be read by other programs. In this case, the shell spawns another instance 
of itself (a sub-shell) to read the file and execute the commands included in it. The shell 
forks to do this, but no exec call is made. The following command requests that the on-line 
UNIX User's Manual [7] entries that describe the who and pr commands be printed on the ter- 
minal: 


man who pr 


(Incidentally, the man command itself is actually implemented as a shell procedure.) From the 
user’s viewpoint, compiled programs and shell procedures are invoked in exactly the same way. 
The shell determines which implementation has been used, rather than requiring the user to do 
so. This preserves the uniformity of invocation and the ease of changing the choice of imple- 
mentation for a given command. The actions of the shell in executing any of these commands 
are illustrated in Figure 1 above. 


3.2 How the Shell Finds Commands 


The shell normally searches for commands in a way that permits them to be found in three dis- 
tinct locations in the file structure. The shell first attempts to find the command (as given on 
the command line) in the current directory; if this fails, it prepends the string /bin to the 
name, and, finally, /usr/bin. The effect is to search, in order, the current directory, then 
the directory /bin, and finally, /usr/bin. For example, the pr and man commands are 
actually the files /bin/pr and /usr/bin/man, respectively. A more complex path name 
may be given, either to locate a file relative to the user’s current directory, or to access a com- 
mand via an absolute path name. If a command name as given begins with a /, ./, or ../ 
(e.g., 7bin/sort or ../cmd), the prepending is mot performed. Instead, a single attempt is 
made to execute the command as given. 


This mechanism gives the user a convenient way to execute public commands and commands 
in or near the current directory, as well as the ability to execute any accessible command 
regardless of its location in the file structure. Because the current directory is usually searched 
first, anyone can possess a private version of a public command without affecting other users. 
Similarly, the creation of a new public command will not affect a user who already has a private 
command with the same name. The particular sequence of directories searched may be 
changed by resetting the PATH variable, as described in §3.4.2. 


3.3 Generation of Argument Lists 


Command arguments are very often file names. A list of file names can be automatically gen- 
erated as arguments on a command line, by specifying a pattern that the shell matches against 
the file names in a directory. 


Most characters in such a pattern match themselves, but there are also special meta-characters 
that may be included in a pattern. These special characters are: *, which matches any string 
including the null string; ?, which matches any one character; any sequence of characters 
enclosed within square brackets? ([...1), which matches any one of the enclosed characters; 
and any sequence of characters preceded by a ! and enclosed within [...1], which matches 


1, As indicated by an appropriate set of permission bits associated with that file. 


2. Be warned that square brackets are also used below for another purpose: in descriptions of commands, they indicate 
that the enclosed argument is optional. See also §5.1 below. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 5 


any one character other than one of the enclosed characters. Inside square brackets, a pair of 
characters separated by a - includes in the set all characters lexically within the inclusive range 
of that pair, so that [a-de] is equivalent to Labcde]. 


For example, *« matches all file names in the current directory, *temp+* matches all file names 
containing temp, [a-£1]* matches all file names that begin with a through f, [10-9] 
matches all single-character names other than the digits, and *.c matches all file names ending 
in .c, while /a1/tf£/bin/? matches all single-character file names found in /a1/tf/bin. 
This capability saves much typing and, more importantly, makes it possible to organize informa- 
tion in large collections of small files that are named in disciplined ways. 


Pattern-matching has some restrictions. If the first character of a file name is a period (.), it 
can be matched only by an argument that literally begins with a period. If a pattern does not 
match any file names, then the pattern itself is returned as the result of the match, for exam- 
ple: 

echo *.c 
will print: 

*.c 


if the current directory contains no files ending in .c. 


Directory names should not contain the characters *, ?, [, or ], because this may cause 
infinite recursion during pattern matching attempts.? 


3.4 Shell Variables 


The shell has several mechanisms for creating variables. A variable is a name representing a 
string value. Certain variables are usually referred to as parameters; these are the variables 
which are normally set only on a command line; there are positional parameters (§3.4.1) and key- 
word parameters (§4.1). Other variables are simply names to which the user or the shell itself 
may assign string values. 


3.4.1 Positional Parameters. When a shell procedure is invoked, the shell implicitly creates 
positional parameters: the argument in position zero on the command line (the name of the shell 
procedure itself) is called $0, the first argument is called $1, and so on. The shift com- 
mand (§4.3) may be used to access arguments in positions numbered higher than nine. 


One can explicitly force values into these positional parameters by using the set command: 
set abc def ghi 


assigns the string abc to the first positional parameter ($1), def to the second ($2), and ghi 
to the third ($3); it also unsets $4, $5, etc., even if they were previously set. $0 may not be 
assigned a value in this way—it always refers to the name of the shell procedure, or, in the 
login shell, to the name of the shell. 


3.4.2 User-defined Variables. The shell also recognizes alphanumeric variables to which 
string values may be assigned. Positional parameters may not appear on the left-hand side of 
an assignment statement; they can only be set as described above. A simple assignment is of 
the form: 


name =string 


3. This is a bug that may be fixed in the future. 


6 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


Thereafter, $name will yield the: value string. A name is a sequence of letters, digits, and 
underscores that begins with a letter or an underscore. Note that no spaces surround the = in 
an assignment statement. 


More than one assignment may appear in an assignment statement, but beware: the shell per- 
forms the assignments from right to left; the following command line results in the variable a 
acquiring the value abc: 


a=$b b=abc 


The following are examples of simple assignments. Double quotes around the right-hand side 
allow blanks, tabs, semi-colons, and new-lines to be included in string, while also allowing vari- 
able substitution (also known as parameter substitution) to occur; that is, references to positional 
parameters and other variable names that are prefaced by $ are replaced by the corresponding 
values, if any; single quotes inhibit variable substitution: 


MAIL=/usr/mail/gas 
var="echo $1 $2 $3 $4" 
Stars=eeene 
asterisks=’$stars’ 


The variable var has as its value the string consisting of the values of the first four positional 
parameters, separated by blanks. No quotes are needed around the string of asterisks being 
assigned to stars because pattern matching (expansion of *, ?, [...1) does not apply in this 
context. Note that the value of $asterisks is the literal string $stars, not the string 
***%*, because the single quotes inhibit substitution. 


In assignments, blanks are not reinterpreted after variable substitution, so that the following 
example results in $first and $second having the same value: 


first=’a string with embedded blanks’ 
second=$first 


In accessing the value of a variable, one may enclose the variable’s name (or the digit designat- 
ing the positional parameter) in braces {} to delimit the variable name from any following 
string.* In particular, if the character immediately following the name is a letter, digit, or 
underscore (digit only for positional parameters), then the braces are required: 


a=’This is a string’ 
echo "${alent test" 


The following variables are used by the shell. Some of them are set by the shell, and all of 
them can be set and reset by the user: 


HOME seis initialized by the login program to the name of the user’s /ogin directory, i.e., 
the directory that becomes the current directory upon completion of a login; cd 
without arguments uses $HOME as the directory to switch to. Using this variable 
helps one to keep full path names out of shell procedures. This is a big help when 
the path name of your login directory is changed (e.g., to balance disk loads). 


MAIL _ is the path name of a file where your mail is deposited. If MAIL is set, then the 
shell checks to see if anything has been added to the file it names and announces 
the arrival of new mail every time you return to command level (e.g., by leaving 
the editor). MAIL must be set by the user. (The presence of mail in the standard 
mail file is also announced at login, regardless of whether MATL is set.) 


4. See §4.4.7 and § 5.7 for other meanings of braces in the shell. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 7 


PATH _ is the variable that specifies where the shell is to look when it is searching for 
commands. Its value is an ordered list of directory path names separated by 
colons. A null character anywhere in that list represents the current directory. 
The shell initializes PATH to the list :/bin:/usr/bin where, by convention, a 
null character appears in front of the first colon. Thus if you wish to search your 
current directory last, rather than first, you would type: 


PATH=/bin:/usr/bin:: 


where the two colons together represent a colon followed by a null followed by a 
colon, thus naming the current directory. A user often has a personal directory of 
commands (say, $HOME/bin) and causes it to be searched before the /bin and 
/usr/bin directories by using: 


PATH=: $HOME/bin:/bin:/usr/bin 


The setting of PATH to other than the default value is normally done in a user’s 
. profile file (§3.9.2). 


CDPATH is the variable that specifies where the shell is to look when searching for the 
argument of the cd command whenever that argument is not null and does not 
begin with /, ./, or ../ (see cd(1), §2.1, and §4.5). The value of CDPATH is 
an ordered list of directory path names separated by colons. A null character any- 
where in that list represents the current directory. By convention, if the list 
begins with a colon, a null character is assumed to precede that colon. Initially, 
CDPATH is unset, resulting in only the current directory being searched. Thus if 
you wish the cd command to first search your current directory and then your 
home directory, you would type: 


CDPATH=: $HOME 


The setting of CDPATH to other than the default value is normally done in a 
user's .profile file (§3.9.2). 


Note that if the cd command changes to a directory that is not a descendent of 
the current directory, it writes the full name of the new directory on the diagnos- 
tic output(§3.6.1, §3.6.2). 


PS1 is the variable that specifies what string is to be used as the primary prompt string. 
If the shell is interactive, it prompts with the value of PS1 when it expects input, 
The default value of PS1 is “‘$ °° (a $ followed by a blank). 


PS2 is the variable that specifies the secondary prompt string. If the shell expects 
more input when it encounters a new-line in its input, it will prompt with the 
value of PS2. The default value of PS2 is “‘> °*’ (a > followed by a blank). 


IFS is the variable that specifies which characters are internal field separators. These 
are the characters the shell uses during blank interpretation. (If you want to parse 
some delimiter-separated data easily, you can set IFS to include that delimiter.) 
The shell initially sets IFS to include the blank, tab, and new-line characters. 


3.4.3 Command Substitution. Any command line can be placed within grave accents 
(*...*) to capture the output of the command. This concept is known as command substitution. 
The command or commands enclosed between grave accents are first executed by the shell and 
then their output replaces the whole expression, grave accents and all. This feature is often 


‘combined with shell variables: 


today=‘date* 


assigns the string representing the current date to the variable today (e.g., 
Tue Nov 27 16:01:09 EST 1979). 


8 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


users=‘who i we -1* 


saves the number of logged-in users in the variable users. Any command that writes to the 
standard output can be enclosed in grave accents. Grave accents (§3.5) may be nested; the 
inside sets must be escaped with \. For example: 


logmsg=*‘echo Your login directory is \‘*pwd\** 


Shell variables can also be given values indirectly by using the read command. The read 
command takes a line from the standard input (usually your terminal) and assigns consecutive 
words on that line to any variables named: 


read first init last 
will take an input line of the form: 
G. A. Snyder 
and have the same effect as if you had typed: 
first=G. init=A. last=Snyder 
The read command assigns any excess ‘“‘words’’ to the last variable. 
3.4.4 Predefined Special Variables. 
ta Beginners should skip this section on first reading. 
Several variables have special meanings; the following are set only by the shell: 


$# records the number of positional arguments passed to the shell, not counting the 
name of the shell procedure itself; $# thus yields the number of the highest- 
numbered positional parameter that is set. Thus, sh x abc sets $# to 3. One of 
its primary uses is in checking for the presence of the required number of arguments: 


if test $# -1t 2 
then 

echo ‘two or more args required’; exit 
£7 


$? is the exit status (also referred to as return code, exit code, or value) of the last com- 
mand executed. Its value is a decimal string. Most UNIX commands return 0 to 
indicate successful completion. The shell itself returns the current value of $? as its 
exit status. 


$$ is the process number of the current process; because process numbers are unique 
among all existing processes, this string of up to five digits is often used to generate 
unique names for temporary files. UNIX provides no mechanism for the automatic 
creation and deletion of temporary files: a file exists until it is explicitly removed. 
Temporary files are generally undesirable objects: the UNIX pipe mechanism is far 
superior for many applications. However, the need for uniquely-named temporary 
files does occasionally occur. The following example also illustrates the recom- 
mended practice of creating temporary files in a directory used only for that purpose: 


temp=$HOME/temp/$$ # use current process number 

ls > $temp # to form unique temp file 
commands, some of which use $temp, go here 

rm $temp # clean up at end 


$! is the process number of the last process run in the background (using &—see §4.4). 
Again, this is a string of up to five digits. 


$- _ is a string consisting of names of execution flags (§3.9.3, §4.7) currently turned on in 
the shell; $- might have the value xv if you are tracing your output. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 9 


3.5 Quoting Mechanisms 


Many characters have a special meaning to the shell which is sometimes necessary to conceal. 
Single quotes (’ ’) and double quotes ("") surrounding a string, or backslash (\) before a sin- 
gle character, provide this function in somewhat different ways. (Grave accents (**) are some- 
times called back quotes, but are used only for command substitution (§3.4.3) in the shell and 
do not hide special meanings of any characters.) 


Within single quotes, all characters (except ’ itself) are taken literally, with any special mean- 
ing removed. Thus: 


’ 


stuff=’echo $? $#; 1s * {| we 


results only in the string echo $? $*; 1s * i we being assigned to the variable stuff, but 
not in any other commands being executed. 


Within double quotes, the special meaning of certain characters does persist, while all other 
characters are taken literally. The characters that retain their special meaning are $, *, and " 
itself. Thus, within double quotes, variables are expanded and command substitution takes 
place; however, any commands in a command substitution are not affected by double quotes 
outside of the grave accents, so that characters such as « retain their special meaning. 


4 


To hide the special meaning of $, *, and " within double quotes, you can precede these char- 
acters with a backslash (\). Outside of double quotes, preceding a character with \ is 
equivalent to placing single quotes around that character. A \ followed by a new-line causes 
that new-line to be ignored, thus allowing continuation of long command lines. 


3.6 Redirection of Input and Output 


In general, most commands neither know nor care whether their input (output) is coming from 
(going to) a terminal or a file. Thus, a command can be used conveniently either at a terminal 
or in a pipeline (see §3.7). A few commands vary their actions depending on the nature of 
their input or output, either for efficiency’s sake, or to avoid useless actions (such as attempting 
random-access I/O on a terminal). 


3.6.1 Standard Input and Standard Output. When a command begins execution, it usually 
expects that three files are already open: a standard input, a standard output, and a diagnostic 
(error) output. A number called a file descriptor is associated with each of these files; by conven- 
tion, file descriptor 0 is associated with standard input, file descriptor 1 with standard output, 
and file descriptor 2 with diagnostic output. A child process normally inherits these files from 
its parent; all three files are initially connected to the terminal (0 to the keyboard, 1 and 2 to 
the printer or screen). The shell permits them to be redirected elsewhere before control is 
passed to an invoked command. An argument to the shell of the form < file or > file opens the 
specified file as the standard input or output, respectively (in the case of output, destroying the 
previous contents of file, if any). An argument of the form >> file directs the standard output 
to the end of file, thus providing a way to append data to it without destroying its existing con- 
tents. In either of the two output cases, the shell creates file if it does not already exist (thus 
> output alone on a line creates a zero-length file). The following appends to file log the 
list of users who are currently logged on: 


who >> log 


Such redirection arguments are only subject to variable and command substitution; neither 


blank interpretation nor pattern matching of file names occurs after these substitutions. Thus: 


echo ‘this is a test’ > #*#.gg9g 
and: 


cat < ? 


10 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


will produce, respectively, a one-line file named *.ggg (a rather disastrous name for a file) 
and an error message (unless you have a file named ?, which is also not a wise choice for a file 
name—see end of §3.3). 


3.6.2 Diagnostic and Other Outputs. Diagnostic output from UNIX commands is tradition- 
ally directed to the file associated with file descriptor 2. (There is often a need for an error 
output file that is different from standard output so that error messages do not get lost down 
pipelines—see §3.7.) One can redirect this error output to a file by immediately prepending the 
number of the file descriptor (i.¢., 2 in this case) to either output redirection symbol (> or 
>>). The following line will append error messages from the cc command to file ERRORS: 


cc testfile.c 2>> ERRORS 


Note that the file descriptor number must be prepended to the redirection symbol without any 
intervening blanks or tabs; otherwise, the number will be passed as an argument to the com- 
mand. 


This method may be generalized to allow one to redirect output associated with any of the first 
ten file descriptors (numbered 0-9) so that, for instance, if cmd puts output on file descriptor 
9, the following line will capture that output in file savedata: 


cmd 9> savedata 


A command often generates standard output and error output, and might even have some other 
output, perhaps a data file. In this case, one can redirect independently all the different out- 
puts. Suppose that cmd directs its standard output to file descriptor 1, its error output to file 
descriptor 2, and builds a data file on file descriptor 9. The following would direct each of 
these three outputs to a different file: 


cmd > standard a> error 9> data 
Other forms of input/output redirection are described in §4.4.8, §4.4.9, and §5.6. 
3.7 Command Lines and Pipelines 


A sequence of one or more commands separated by | (or “) make up a pipeline. In a pipeline 
consisting of more than one command, each command is run as a separate process connected to 
its neighbor(s) by pipes, i.e., the output of each command (except the last one) becomes the 
input of the next command in line. A filter is a command that reads its standard input, 
transforms it in some way, then writes it as its standard output. A pipeline normally consists of 
a series of filters. Although the processes in a pipeline are permitted to execute in parallel, 
they are synchronized to the extent that each program needs to read the output of its predeces- 
sor. Many commands operate on individual lines of text, reading a line, processing it, writing it 
out, and looping back for more input. Some must read larger amounts of data before producing 
output; sort is an example of the extreme case that requires all input to be read before any 
output is produced. 


The following is an example of a typical pipeline: nroff is a text formatter whose output may 
contain reverse line motions; col converts these motions to a form that can be printed on a 
terminal lacking reverse-motion capability; greek is used to adapt the output to a specific ter- 
minal, here specified by -Thp. The flag -cm indicates one of the commonly used formatting 
options, and text is the name of the file to be formatted: 
nroff -cm text i col i greek -Thp 
.3.8 Examples 


The following examples illustrate the variety of effects that can be obtained by combining a few 
commands in the ways described above. It may be helpful to try these examples at a terminal: 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 11 


e who 
Print (on the terminal) the list of logged-in users. 


e who >> log 
Append the list of logged-in users to the end of file log. 


e who | we -1 
Print the number of logged-in users. (The argument to we is minus ell.) 


e who i pr 
Print a paginated list of logged-in users. 


e who | sort 


Print an alphabetized list of logged-in users. 


e who | grep pw 
Print the list of logged-in users whose login names contain the string pw. 


e who | grep pw! sort! pr 


Print an alphabetized, paginated list of logged-in users whose login names contain the 
string pw. 


e { date; who i wc -1; } >> log 
Append (to file log) the current date followed by the count of logged-in users (see 
§4.4.7 for the meaning of {...} in this context). 


e who | sed ’s/ .*//’ {| sort i uniq -d 


Print only the login names of all users who are logged in more than once. 


The who command does not by itself provide options to yield all these results—they are 
obtained by combining who with other commands. Note that who just serves as the data 
source in these examples. As an exercise, replace who | by < /etc/passwd in the above 
examples to see how a file can be used as a data source in the same way. Notice that redirec- 
tion arguments may appear anywhere on the command line, 


3.9 Changing the State of the Shell and the .profile File 


The state of a given instance of the shell includes the values of positional parameters (§3.4.1), 
user-defined variables (§3.4.2), environment variables (§4.1), modes of execution (§4.7), and 
the current working directory. 


The state of a shell may be altered in various ways. These include the cd command, several 
flags that can be set by the user, and a file in one’s login directory called .profile that is 
treated specially by the shell. 


3.9.1 Cd. The cd command changes the current directory to the one specified as its argu- 
ment. This can (and should) be used to change to a convenient place in the directory struc- 
ture; cd is often combined with () to cause a sub-shell to change to a different directory and 
execute a group of commands without affecting the original shell. The first sequence below 
extracts the component files of the archive file /a1/tf£/q.a and places them in whatever 
directory is the current one; the second places them in directory /a1/tf: 


ar x /al/tf/q.a 
(cd /ail/tf; ar x q.a) 


3.9.2 The .profile File. When you log in, the shell is invoked to read your commands. 


‘First, however, the shell checks to see if a file named /etc/profile exists on your UNIX 


system, and if it does, commands are read from it; /etc/profile is used by system 
administrators to set up variables needed by all users. Type: 


cat /etc/profile 


12 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


to see what your system administrator has already done for you. After this, the shell proceeds 
to see if you have a file named . profile in your login directory. If so, commands are read 
and executed from it. For a sample . profile, see profile(5). Finally, the shell is ready to 
read commands from your standard input— usually the terminal. 


3.9.3 Execution Flags: set. The set command provides the capability of altering several 
aspects of the behavior of the shell by setting certain shell flags. In particular, the x and v flags 
may be useful from the terminal. Flags may be set by typing, for example: 


set -xv 

(to turn on flags x and v). The same flags may be turned off by typing: 
set +xXVv 

These two flags have the following meaning: 


-v Input lines are printed as they are read by the shell. This flag is particularly useful for 
isolating syntax errors. The commands on each input line are executed after that 
input line is printed. 


-x Commands and their arguments are printed as they are executed. (Shell control com- 
mands, such as for, while, etc., are not printed, however.) Note that -x causes a 
trace of only those commands that are actually executed, whereas -v prints each line 
of input until a syntax error is detected. 


The set command is also used to set these and other flags within shell procedures (see §4.7). 


4. USING THE SHELL AS A COMMAND: SHELL PROCEDURES 
4.1 A Command’s Environment 


All the variables (with their associated values) that are known to a command at the beginning 
of execution of that command constitute its environment. This environment includes variables 
that the command inherits from its parent process and variables specified as keyword parameters 
on the command line that invokes the command. 


The variables that a shell passes to its child processes are those that have been named as argu- 
ments to the export command. The export command places the named variables in the 
environments of both the shell and all its future child processes. 


Keyword parameters are variable-value pairs that appear in the form of assignments, normally 
before the procedure name on a command line (but see also -k flag in §4.7). Such variables 
are placed in the environment of the procedure being invoked. For example: 


# key command 
echo $a $b 


is a simple procedure that echoes the values of two variables; if it is invoked as: 
askey1 b=key2 key_command 

then the output is: 
key1 key2 

A procedure’s keyword parameters are not included in the argument count $# (§3.4.4). 


_ A procedure may access the value of any variable in its environment; however, if changes are 
made to the value of a variable, these changes are not reflected in the environment—they are 
local to the procedure in question. In order for these changes to be placed in the environment 
that the procedure passes to its child processes, the variable must be named as an argument to 
the export command within that procedure (but see §4.2 below). To obtain a list of variables 
that have been made exportable from the current shell, type: 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 13 


export 


(You will also get a list of variables that have been made readonly~—see §4.5 below.) To get 
a list of name-value pairs in the current environment, type: 


env 
4.2 Invoking the Shell 
The shell is an ordinary command and may be invoked in the same way as other commands: 


sh proc [ arg... ] A new instance of the shell is explicitly invoked to read proc. 
Arguments, if any, can be manipulated as described in §4.3. 


sh -v proc [arg...] This is equivalent to putting set -v at the beginning of proc. 
Similarly for the x, e, u, and n flags (§3.9.3, §4.7). 


proc L arg... ] If proc is marked executable, and is not a compiled, executable pro- 
gram, the effect is similar to that of sh proc [ args... ]. An 
advantage of this form is that proc may be found by the search pro- 
cedure described in §3.2 and §3.4.2. Also, variables that have been 
exported in the shell will still be exported from proc when this 
form is used (because the shell only forks to read commands 
from proc). Thus any changes made within proc to the values of 
exported variables will be passed on to subsequent commands 
invoked from within proc. 


There are several shell invocation flags that are sometimes useful for more advanced shell pro- 
gramming. They are described in §5.8. 


4.3 Passing Arguments to the Shell; shift 


When a command line is scanned, any character sequence of the form $n is replaced by the nth 
argument to the shell, counting the name of the shell procedure itself as $0. This notation 
permits direct reference to the procedure name and to as many as nine positional parameters 
(§3.4.1). Additional arguments can be processed using the shift command or by using a 
for loop (§4.4.4). 


The shift command shifts arguments to the left; i.e., the value of $1 is thrown away, $2 
replaces $1, $3 replaces $2, etc.; the highest-numbered positional parameter becomes unset. 
($0 is never shifted.) The command shift n is a shorthand notation for nm consecutive 
shifts; shift 0 does nothing. For example, consider the shell procedure ripple below: 
echo writes its arguments to the standard output; while is discussed in §4.4.3 (it is a looping 
command); lines that begin with # are comments. 


# ripple command 
while test $# != 0 
do 


echo $1 $2 $3 $4 $5 $6 $7 $8 $9 
shift 
done 


If the procedure were invoked by: 


ripple abe 


it would print: 


abc 
bec 
c 


14 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


The notation $* causes substitution of all positional parameters except $0. Thus, the echo 
line in the ripple example above could be written more compactly as: 


echo $x 


These two echo commands are not equivalent: the first prints at most nine positional parame- 
ters; the second prints all of the current positional parameters. The $* notation is more con- 
cise and less error-prone. One obvious application is in passing an arbitrary number of argu- 
ments to a command such as the nroff text formatter: 


nroff -h -rW120 -T450 -cm $« 


It is important to understand the sequence of actions used by the shell in scanning command 
lines and substituting arguments. The shell first reads input up to a new-line or semicolon, and 
then parses that much of the input. Variables are replaced by their values and then command 
substitution (via grave accents) is attempted. I/O redirection arguments are detected, acted 
upon, and deleted from the command line. Next the shell scans the resulting command line 
for internal field separators, that is, for any characters specified by IFS to break the command 
line into distinct arguments; explicit null arguments (specified by "" or *’) are retained, while 
implicit null arguments resulting from evaluation of variables that are null or not set are 
removed. Then file name generation occurs, with all meta-characters being expanded. The 
resulting command line is executed by the shell. 


Sometimes, one builds command lines inside a shell procedure. In this case, one might want to 
have the shell rescan the command line after all the initial substitutions and expansions are 
done. The special command eval is available for this purpose; eval takes a command line as 
its argument and simply rescans the line, performing any variable or command substitutions 
that are specified. Consider the following (simplified) situation: 

command=who 

output=’ i we -1’ 

eval $command $output 


This segment of code results in the pipeline who | we -1 being executed. 
The output of eval cannot be redirected; uses of eval can, however, be nested. 
4.4 Control Commands 


The shell provides several flow-of-control commands that are useful in creating shell pro- 
cedures. To explain them, we first need a few definitions. 


A simple command is as defined in §3.1. I/O redirection arguments can appear in a simple com- 
mand line and are passed to the shell, not to the command. 


A command is a simple command or any of the shell control commands described below. A 
pipeline is a sequence of one or more commands separated by |. (For historical reasons, ~ is a 
synonym for | in this context.) The standard output of each command but the last in a pipe- 
line is connected (by a pipe(2)) to the standard input of the next command. Each command in 
a pipeline is run separately; the shell waits for the last command to finish. The exit status of a 
pipeline is non-zero if the exit status of either the first or last process in the pipeline is non- 
zero. (This is a bit weird, and may be changed in the future.) 


A command list is a sequence of one or more pipelines separated by ;, &, &&, or ti, and 
optionally terminated by ; or & A semicolon (;) causes sequential execution of the previous 
. pipeline (i.e., the shell waits for the pipeline to finish before reading the next pipeline), while & 
causes asynchronous execution of the preceding pipeline; both sequential and asynchronous 
execution are thus allowed. An asynchronous pipeline continues execution until it terminates 
voluntarily, or until its processes are killed. In the first example below, the shell executes 
who, waits for it to terminate, then executes date and waits for it to terminate; in the second 
example, the shell invokes both commands in order, but does not wait for either one to finish. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 15 


Figure 2 shows the actions of the shell involved in executing these two command lists: 


who >log; date 
who >log& date& 


SH FORK WAIT FORK WAIT 


(ASLEEP) 


2,3 
EXIT EXIT 


SH FORK FORK (FREE TO DO OTHER COMMANDS) 


Figure 2 


More typical uses of & include off-line printing, background compilation, and generation of jobs 
to be sent to other computers. For example, if you type: 


nohup cc prog.c& 


you may continue working while the C compiler runs in the background. A command line end- 
ing with & is immune to interrupts and quits, but it is wise to make it immune to hang-ups as 
well. The nohup command is used for this purpose. Without nohup, if you hang up while 
cc in the above example is still executing, cc will be killed and your output will disappear. 


te The & operator should be used with restraint, especially on heavily-loaded systems. Other users 
will not consider you a good citizen if you start up a large number of simultaneous, asynchronous 
processes without a compelling reason for doing so. 

The && and || operators, which are of equal precedence (but lower than & and 1), cause con- 

ditional execution of pipelines. In cmd1 it cmd2, cmd 11 is executed and its exit status exam- 

ined. Only if cmd1 fails (i.e., has a non-zero exit status) is cmd2 executed. This is thus a 

more terse notation for: 


Gis 2 cmd1 

test $? != 0 
then 

cmd2 
£5 


See writemail in §6 for an example of use of | 


16 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


The && operator yields the complementary test: in cmd1 && cmd2, the second command is 
executed only if the first succeeds (has a zero exit status). In the sequence below, each com- 
mand is executed in order until one fails: 


emd1 && cmd2 && cmd3 && ... && cmdn 


A simple command in a pipeline may be replaced by a command list enclosed in either 
parentheses or braces. The output of all the commands so enclosed is combined into one 
stream that becomes the input to the next command in the pipeline. The following line prints 
two separate documents in a way similar to that shown in a previous example (§3.7): 


{ nroff -cm text1; nroff -cm text2; } | col | greek -Thp 
See §4.4.7 for further details on command grouping. 
All of the following commands are formally described in sh(1). 


4.4.1 Structured Conditional: if. The shell provides an if command. The simplest form 
of the if command is: 


if command list 
then command list 
fi 


The command list following if is executed and if the last command in the list has a zero exit 
status, then the command list that follows then is executed; fi indicates the end of the if 
command. 


In order to cause an alternative set of commands to be executed in the case where the command 
list following if has a non-zero exit status, one may add an else-clause to the form given 
above. This results in the following structure: 


if command list 
then command list 
else command list 
fi. 


Multiple tests can be achieved in an if command by using the elif clause. For example: 


Lt test -f£ "$1" # is $1 a file? 

then pr $1 

elif test -d "$1" # else, is $1 a directory? 
then (ed $13 pr «) 

else echo $1 is neither a file nor a directory 
fi 


The above example is executed as follows: if the value of the first positional parameter is a file 
name, then print that file; if not, then check to see if it is the name of a directory. If so, 
change to that directory and print all the files there. Otherwise, echo the error message. 


The if command may be nested (but be sure to end each one with a fi). The new-lines in 
the above examples of if may be replaced by semicolons. 


The exit status of the if command is the exit status of the last command executed in any 
then clause or else clause. If no such command was executed, if returns a zero exit status. 


4.4.2 Multi-way Branch: case. A multiple way branch is provided by the case command. 
The basic format of case is: 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 17 


case string in 
pattern) command list; ; 


pattern) command list; ; 
esac 


The shell tries to match string against each pattern in turn, using the same pattern-matching 
conventions as in file-name generation (§3.3). If a match is found, the command list following 
the matched pattern is executed; the ; ; serves as a break out of the case and is required after 
each command list except the last. Note that only one pattern is ever matched, and that 
matches are attempted in order, so that if * is the first pattern in as case, no other patterns 
will ever be looked at. 


More than one pattern may be associated with a given command list by specifying alternate pat- 
terns separated by |. For example: 


case $i in 


*.c) ce $i 
+3 
*. hi*.sh) # do nothing 
33 
*) echo "$i of unknown type" 


$3 
esac 
In the above example, no action is taken for the second set of patterns because the null com- 
mand is specified; * is used as a default pattern, because it matches any word. 


The exit status of case is the exit status of the last command executed in the case com- 
mand. If no commands were executed, then case has a zero exit status. 


4.4.3 Conditional Looping: while and until. A while command has the general 
form: 


while command list 
do 

command list 
done 


The commands in the first command list are executed, and if the exit status of the last command 
in that list is zero, then the commands in the second list are executed. This sequence is 
repeated as long as the exit status of the first command list is zero. A loop can be executed as 
long as the first command list returns a non-zero exit status by replacing while with until. 


Any new-line in the above example may be replaced by a semicolon. The exit status of a 
while (until) command is the exit status of the last command executed in the second com- 
mand list. If no such command is executed, while (until) has exit status zero. 


4.4.4 Looping over a List: for. Often, one wishes to perform some set of operations for 
each in a set of files, or execute some command once for each of several arguments. The for 
command can be used to accomplish this. The for command has the format: 


for variable in word list 
do 

command list 
done 


where word list is a list of strings separated by blanks. The commands in the command list are 
executed once for each word in word list. Variable takes on as its value each word from word 
list, in. turn; word list is fixed after it is evaluated the first time. For example, the following for 
loop will cause each of the C source files xec.c, cmd.c, and word.c in the current direc- 
tory to be diffed with a file of the same name in the directory /usr/src/cmd/sh: 


18 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


for cfile in xec cmd word 
do Giff $Scfile.c /usr/src/cmd/sh/$cfile.c 
done 


‘ 


One can omit the “in word list’? part of a for command; this will cause the current set of 
positional parameters to be used in place of word list. This is very convenient when one wishes 
to write a command that performs the same set of commands for each of an unknown number 
of arguments. See nu11 in §6 for an example of this feature. 


4.4.5 Loop Control: break and continue. The break command can be used to ter- 
minate execution of a while, until, or a for loop; continue requests the execution of 
the next iteration of the loop. These commands are effective only when they appear between 
do and done. 


The break command terminates execution of the smallest (i.e., innermost) enclosing loop, 
causing execution to resume after the nearest following unmatched done. Exit from n levels is 
obtained by break n. 


The continue command causes execution to resume at the nearest enclosing while, 
until, or for, i.e., the one that begins the innermost loop containing the continue; one 
can also specify an argument 7 to continue and execution will resume at the nth enclosing 
loop: 


# This procedure is interactive; ‘break’ and ‘continue’ 
# commands are used to allow the user to control data entry. 
while true 
do echo "Please enter data" 
read response 
case "$response" in 
"done") break # no more data 
33 
ay continue 
33 
*) 
process the data here 
33 
esac 
done 


4.4.6 End-of-file and exit. When the shell reaches the end-of-file, it terminates execution, 
returning to its parent the exit status of the last command executed prior to the end-of-file. 
The exit command simply reads to the end-of-file and returns, setting the exit status to the 
value of its argument, if any. Thus, a procedure can be terminated ‘‘normally’’ by using 
exit 0. 


4.4.7 Command Grouping: Parentheses and Braces. There are two methods for grouping 
commands in the shell. As mentioned in §3.9.1, parentheses () cause the shell to spawn a 
sub-shell that reads the enclosed commands. Both the right and left parentheses are recognized 
wherever they appear in a command line—they can appear as literal parentheses only by being 
quoted. For example, if you type garble(stuff) the shell interprets this as four separate 
words: garble, (, stuff, and ). 


This sub-shell capability is useful if one wishes to perform some operations without affecting 
the values of variables in the current shell, or to temporarily change directory and execute 
. some commands in the new directory without having to explicitly return to the current direc- 
tory. The current environment is passed to the sub-shell and variables that are exported in 
the current shell are also exported in the sub-shell. Thus: 


current=‘pwd*; ed /usr/docs/sh_tut; 


nohup mm -Tlp se _? | lpr& cd $current 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 19 


and: 


(cd /usr/docs/sh_tut; nohup mm -Tlp sc ? | Ipré) 


accomplish the same result: a copy of this tutorial is printed on the line printer; however, the 
second example automatically puts you back in your original working directory. In the second 
example above, blanks or new-lines surrounding the parentheses are allowed but not necessary. 
The shell will prompt with $PS2 ifa ) is expected. See also the example in §3.9.1. 


Braces {} may also be used to group commands together.’ Both the left and the right brace are 
recognized only if they appear as the first (unquoted) word of a command. The opening brace 
{ may be followed by a new-line (in which case the shell will prompt for more input). Unlike 
in the case of parentheses, no sub-shell is spawned for braces; the enclosed commands are sim- 
ply read by the shell. The braces are convenient when you wish to use the (sequential) output 
of several commands as input to one command; see the last example in §4.4 above. 


The exit status of a set of commands grouped by either parentheses or braces is the exit status 
of the last enclosed executed command. 


4.4.8 Input/Output Redirection and Control Commands. The shell normally does not 
fork when it recognizes the control commands (other than parentheses) described above. How- 
ever, each command in a pipeline is run as a separate process in order to direct input (output) 
to (from) each command. Also, when redirection of input/output is specified explicitly for a 
control command, a separate process is spawned to execute that command. Thus, when if, 
while, until, case, or for is used in a pipeline consisting of more than one command, 
the shell forks and a sub-shell runs the control command. This has certain implications; the 
most noticeable one is that any changes made to variables within the control command are not 
effective once that control command finishes (similar to the effect of using parentheses to group 
commands). The control commands run slightly slower when redirection is specified. 


ta Beginners should skip to Section 4.5 on first reading. 
4.4.9 In-line Input Documents. Upon seeing a command line of the form: 
command << eofstring 


where eofstring is any arbitrary string, the shell will take the subsequent lines as the standard 
input of command until a line is read consisting only of eofstring (possibly preceded by one or 
more tab characters). By appending a minus (-) to <<, leading tab characters are deleted from 
each line of the input document before the shell passes the line to command. 


The shell creates a temporary file containing the input document and performs variable and 
command substitution (§3.4.3) on its contents before passing it to the command... Pattern 
matching on file names is performed on the arguments of command lines in command substitu- 
tions. In order to prohibit all substitutions, one may quote any character of eofstring:® 


command << \eofstring 


The in-line input document feature is especially useful for small amounts of input data (e.g., an 
editor ‘‘script’’), where it is more convenient to place the data in the shell procedure than to 
keep it in a separate file. For instance, one could type: 


5. See §3.4.2 and §5.7 for other meanings of braces in the shell. 
6. Typically, eofstring consists of a single character; | is often used for this purpose. 


20 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


cat <<- xyz 
This message will be printed on the 
terminal with leading tabs removed. 
xYZ 


This in-line input document feature is most useful in shell procedures. See edfind, 
edlast, and mmt in §6. Note that in-line input documents may not appear within grave 
accents.’ 


4.4.10 Transfer to Another File and Back: the Dot (.) Command. A command line of 
the form: 


proc 


causes the shell to read commands from proc without spawning a new process. Changes made 
to variables in proc are in effect after the dot command finishes. This is thus a good way to 
gather a number of shell variable initializations into one file. Note that an exit command ina 
file executed in this manner will cause an exit from your current shell; if you are at login level, 
you will be logged out. 


4.4.11 Interrupt Handling: trap. As noted in §2.2, a program may choose to catch an 
interrupt from the terminal, ignore it completely, or be terminated by it. Shell procedures can 
use the trap command to obtain the same effects. 


trap arg signal-list 


is the form of the trap command, where arg is a string to be interpreted as a command list 
and signal-list consists of one or more signal numbers (as described in signal(2)). The com- 
mands in arg are scanned at least once, when the shell first encounters the trap command. 
Because of this, it is usually wise to use single rather than double quotes to surround these 
commands. The former inhibit immediate command and variable substitution; this becomes 
important, for instance, when one wishes to remove temporary files and the names of those 
files have not yet been determined when the trap command is first read by the shell. The fol- 
lowing procedure will print the name of the current directory on the file errdirect when it 
is interrupted, thus giving the user information as to how much of the job was done: 


trap ‘echo ‘pwd* >errdirect’ 2 3 15 
for iin /bin /usr/bin /usr/gas/bin 
do 
cd $i 
commands to be executed in directory $i here 
done 


while the same procedure with double (rather than single) quotes 
(trap "echo ‘pwd* >errdirect" 2 3 15) will, instead, print the name of the directory 
from which the procedure was executed. 


Signal 11 (SEGMENTATION VIOLATION) may never be trapped, because the shell itself 
needs to catch it to deal with memory allocation. Zero is not a UNIX signal, but is effectively 
interpreted by the trap command as a signal generated by exiting from a shell (either via an 
exit command, or by “‘falling through’’ the end of a procedure). If arg is not specified, then 
the action taken upon receipt of any of the signals in signal-list is reset to the default system 
action. If arg is an explicit null string (’’ or ""), then the signals in signal-list are ignored by 
the shell. 


7. This is a implementation bug that should (and may) be fixed eventually. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial | 


The most frequent use of trap is to assure removal of temporary files upon termination of a 
procedure. The second example of §3.4.4 would be written more typically as follows: 


temp=$HOME/temp/ $$ 
trap ‘rm $temp; trap 0; exit’ 0 12 3 15 
ls > $temp 

commands, some of which use $temp, go here 


In this example, whenever signals 1 (HANGUP), 2 (INTERRUPT), 3 (QUIT), or 15 
(SOFTWARE TERMINATION) are received by the shell procedure, or whenever the shell pro- 
cedure is about to exit, the commands enclosed between the single quotes will be executed. 
The exit command must be included, or else the shell continues reading commands where it 
left off when the signal was received. The trap 0 turns off the original trap on exits from the 
shell, so that the exit command does not reactivate the execution of the trap commands. 


Sometimes it is useful to take advantage of the fact that the shell continues reading commands 
after executing the trap commands. The following procedure takes each directory in the current 
directory, changes to it, prompts with its name, and executes commands typed at the terminal 
until an end-of-file (control-d) or an interrupt is received. An end-of-file causes the read 
command to return a non-zero exit status, thus terminating the while loop and restarting the 
cycle for the next directory; the entire procedure is terminated if interrupted when waiting for 
input, but during the execution of a command, an interrupt terminates only that command: 


dir=* pwd* 
€Oxe. -A~ Lr x 
do if test -d $dir/$i 
then cd $dir/$i 
while echo "$i:" 
trap exit 2 
read x 
do trap : 2 # ignore interrupts 
eval $x 
done 
pa 
done 


Several traps may be in effect at the same time; if multiple signals are received simultane- 
ously, they are serviced in ascending order. To check what traps are currently set, type: 


trap 


It is important to understand some things about the way in which the shell implements the 
trap command in order not to be surprised. When a signal (other than 11) is received by the 
shell, it is passed on to whatever child processes are currently executing. When those (syn- 
chronous) processes terminate, normally or abnormally, the shell then polls any traps that hap- 
pen to be set and executes the appropriate trap commands. This process is straightforward, 
except in the case of traps set at the command (outermost, or login) level; in this case, it is 
possible that no child process is running, so the shell waits for the termination of the first pro- 
cess spawned after the signal is received before it polls the traps. 


For internal commands, the shell normally polls traps on completion of the command; an 
exception to this rule is made for the read command, for which traps are serviced immedi- 
ately, so that read can be interrupted while waiting for input. 


4.5 Special Shell Commands 


There are several special commands that are internal to the shell (some of which have already 
been mentioned). These commands should be used in preference to other UNIX commands 
whenever possible, because they are, in general, faster and more efficient. The shell does not 
fork to execute these commands, so no additional processes are spawned; the trade-off for this 
efficiency is that redirection of input/output is not allowed for most of these special commands. 


22 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 


Several of the special commands have already been described in §4.4 because they affect the 
flow of control. They are break, continue, exit, dot (.), and trap. The set com- 
mand described in §3.4.1 and §3.9.3 is also a special command. Descriptions of the remaining 
special commands are given here: 


* 


cd arg 


exec arg... 


newgrparg... 


read var... 


readonly var... 


test 


times 


umask nnn 


ulimita 


waitn 


The null command; this command does nothing; the exit status is zero 
(true). Beware: any arguments to the null command are parsed for 
syntactic correctness; when in doubt, quote such arguments. Parame- 
ter substitution takes place, just as in other commands. 


Make arg the current directory. If arg does not begin with /, ./, or 
../, cd uses the CDPATH shell variable (§3.4.2) to locate a parent 
directory that contains the directory arg. If arg is not a directory, or 
the user is not authorized to access it, a non-zero exit status is 
returned. Specifying cd with no arg is equivalent to typing 
cd $HOME. 


If arg is a command, then the shell executes it without forking. No 
new process is created. Input/output redirection arguments are allowed 
on the command line. If only input/output redirection arguments 
appear, then the input/output of the shell itself is modified accordingly. 
See merge in §6 for an example of this use of exec. 


The newgrp(1) command is executed, replacing the shell; nmewgrp in 
turn spawns a new shell; see newgrp(1). Beware: Only variables in the 
environment will be known in the shell that is spawned by the newgrp 
command. Any variables that were exported will no longer be 
marked as such. 


One line (up to a new-line) is read from standard input and the first 
word is assigned to the first variable, the second word to the second 
variable, and so on. All left-over words are assigned to the Jast vari- 
able. The exit status of read is zero unless an end-of-file is read. 


The specified variables are made readonly so that no subsequent 
assignments may be made to them. If no arguments are given, a list of 
all readonly and of all exported variables is given. 


A conditional expression is evaluated. More details are given in §5.1 
below. 


The accumulated user and system times for processes run from the 
current shell are printed. 


The user file creation mask is set to nnn; see umask(2) for details. If 
nnn is omitted, then the current value of the mask is printed. 


This command imposes a limit of m blocks on the size of files written 
by the shell and its child processes (files of any size may be read). If n 
is omitted, the current value of this limit is printed. The default value 
for n varies from on installation to another. 


The shell waits for the child process whose process number is 7 to ter- 
minate; the exit status of the wait command is that of the process 
waited on. If m is omitted or is not a child of the current shell, then ail 
currently active processes are waited for and the return code of the 
wait command is zero. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 23 


4.6 Creation and Organization of Shell Procedures 


A shell procedure can be created in two simple steps: first, one builds an ordinary text file; then 
one changes its mode to make it executable, thus permitting it to be invoked by proc args, rather 
than by sh proc args. The second step may be omitted for a procedure to be used once or twice 
and then discarded, but is recommended for longer-lived ones. Here is the entire input needed 
to set up a simple procedure (the executable part of draft in §6): 


ed 
a 
nroff -rC3 -7T450-12 -cm $* 


w draft 


q 
chmod +x draft 


It may then be invoked as draft file1 file2. Note that shell procedures must always be 
at least readable, so that the shell itself can read commands from the file. 


If draft were thus created in a directory whose name appears in the user’s PATH variable, the 
user could change working directories and still invoke the draft command. 


Shell procedures may be created dynamically. A procedure may generate a file of commands, 
invoke another instance of the shell to execute that file, and then remove it. An alternate 
approach is that of using the dot command (.) to make the current shell read commands from 
the new file, allowing use of existing shell variables and avoiding the spawning of an additional 
process for another shell. 


Many users prefer to write shell procedures instead of C programs. First, it is easy to create 
and maintain a shell procedure because it is only a file of ordinary text. Second, it has no 
corresponding object program that must be generated and maintained. Third, it is easy to 
create a procedure on the fly, use it a few times, and then remove it. Finally, because shell 
procedures are usually short in length, written in a high-level programming language, and kept 
only in their source-language form, they are generally easy to find, understand, and modify. 


By convention, directories that contain only commands and/or shell procedures are usually 
named bin. Most groups of users sharing common interests have one or more bin directories 
set up to hold common procedures. Some users have their PATH variable list several such 
directories. Although you can have a number of such directories, it is unwise to go 
overboard—it may become difficult to keep track of your environment, and efficiency may 
suffer (§7.3). 


4.7 More about Execution Flags 
There are several execution flags available in the shell that can be useful in shell procedures: 


-e The shell will exit immediately if any command that it executes exits with a non-zero 
exit status. 


-u _-—-~ When this flag is set, the shell treats the use of an unset variable as an error. This 
flag can be used to perform a global check on variables. 


-t The shell exits after reading and executing the commands on the remainder of the 
current input line. 


-n This is a don’t execute flag. On occasion, one may want to check a procedure for syn- 
tax errors, but not to execute the commands in the procedure. Writing set -nv at 
the beginning of the file will accomplish this. 


-k All arguments of the form variable=value are treated as keyword parameters. When 
this flag is not set, only such arguments that appear before the command name are 
treated as keyword parameters. 


24 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


5. MISCELLANEOUS SUPPORTING COMMANDS AND FEATURES 


Shell procedures can make use of any UNIX command. The commands described in this sec- 
tion are either used especially frequently in shell procedures, or are explicitly designed for such 
use. More detailed descriptions of each of these commands can be found in Section 1 of the 
UNIX User's Manual [7]. 


5.1 Conditional Evaluation: test 


The test command evaluates the expression specified by its arguments and, if the expression 
is true, returns a zero exit status; otherwise, a non-zero (false) exit status is returned; test 
also returns a non-zero exit status if it has no arguments. Often it is convenient to use the 
test command as the first command in the command list following an if or a while. Shell 
variables used in test expressions should be enclosed in double quotes if there is any chance 
of their being null or not set. 


On some UNIX systems, the square brackets ([ ]) may be used as an alias for test; e.g., 
[ expression ] has the same effect as test expression. 


The following is a partial list of the primaries that can be used to construct a conditional expres- 
sion: 


-x file true if the named file exists and is readable by the user. 

-w file true if the named file exists and is writable by the user. 

-x file true if the named file exists and is executable by the user. 

-s file true if the named file exists and has a size greater than zero. 

-d file true if the named file exists and is a directory. 

-f file true if the named file exists and is an ordinary file. 

-p file true if the named file exists and is a named pipe (fifo). 

-z sl true if the length of string s/ is zero. 

-n sl true if the length of the string s/ is non-zero. 

-t fildes true if the open file whose file descriptor number is fildes is associated with a 
terminal device. If fildes is not specified, file descriptor 1 is used by default. 

Sica 's2 true if strings s] and s2 are identical. 

sl |= s2 true if strings sJ and s2 are not identical. 

sl true if s] is not the null string. 


nl -eq n2_ true if the integers nJ and n2 are algebraically equal; other algebraic comparis- 
ons are indicated by -ne, -gt, -ge, -1t, and -le. 


These primaries may be combined with the following operators: 


! unary negation operator. 


-a binary logical and operator. 
=o binary logical or operator; it has lower precedence than -a. 
( expr ) parentheses for grouping; they must be escaped to remove their significance to 


the shell; in the absence of parentheses, evaluation proceeds from left to right. 


Note that all primaries, operators, file names, etc., are separate arguments to test. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial P| 


5.2 Reading a Line: line 


The line command takes one line from standard input and prints it on standard output. This 
is useful when you need to read a line from a file, or capture the line in a variable. The func- 
tions of line and of the read command that is internal to the shell differ in that 
input/output redirection is possible only with line. If the user does not require input/output 
redirection, read is faster and more efficient. An example of a usage of line for which 
read would not suffice is: 


firstline=‘line < somefile* 
5.3 Simple Output: echo 


The echo command, invoked as echo [ arg... | copies its arguments to the standard output, 
each followed by a single space, except for the last argument, which is normally followed by a 
new-line; often, it is used to prompt the user for input, to issue diagnostics in shell procedures, 
or to add a few lines to an output stream in the middle of a pipeline. Another use is to verify 
the argument list generation process before issuing a command that does something drastic. 
The command 1s is often replaced by echo *, because the latter is faster and prints fewer 
lines of output. 


The echo command recognizes several escape sequences. A \n yields a new-line character; a 
\c removes the new-line from the end of the echoed line. The following prompts the user, 
allowing one to type on the same line as the prompt: 


echo ‘enter name:\c’ 
read name 


The echo command also recognizes octal escape sequences for all characters, whether printable 
or not: echo "\007" typed at a terminal will cause the bell on that terminal to ring. 


5.4 Expression Evaluation: expr 


The expr command provides arithmetic and logical operations on integers and some pattern 
matching facilities on its arguments. It evaluates a single expression and writes the result on 
the standard output; expr can be used inside grave accents to set a variable. Typical examples 
are: 


# increment $a 

a=‘expr $a + 1° 

# put third through last characters of 
# $1 into substring 

substring=*expr “$1" : °%..\(.#\)%* 

# obtain length of $1 

c=‘expr i a id $ rn ag 


The most common uses of expr are in counting iterations of a loop and in using its pattern 
matching capability to pick apart strings; see expr(1) for more details. 


§.5 trueand false 


The true and false commands perform the obvious functions of exiting with zero and 
non-zero exit status, respectively. The true command is often used to implement an uncon- 
ditional loop. 


5.6 Input/Output Redirection Using File Descriptors. 


‘war Beginners should skip this section on first reading. 


Above (§3.6.2), we mentioned that a command occasionally directs output to some file associ- 
ated with a file descriptor other than 1 or 2. In languages such as C, one can associate output 
with any file descriptor by using the write(2) system call. The shell provides its own mechan- 
ism for creating an output file associated with a particular file descriptor. By typing: 


26 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


fdl >&fd2 


where fd/ and fd2 are valid file descriptors, one can direct output that would normally be associ- 
ated with file descriptor fd] onto the file associated with fd2. The default value for fdl and fd2 
is 1. If, at execution time, no file is associated with fd2, then the redirection is void. The 
most common use of this mechanism is that of directing standard error output to the same file 
as standard output. This is accomplished by typing: 


command 2>&1 


If one wanted to redirect both standard output and standard error output to the same file, one 
would type: 


command 1> file 2>&1 


The order here is significant: first, file descriptor 1 is associated with file; then file descriptor 2 is 
associated with the same file as is currently associated with file descriptor 1. If the order of the 
redirections were reversed, standard error output would go to the terminal, and standard output 
would go to file, because at the time of the error output redirection, file descriptor 1 still would 
have been associated with the terminal. 


This mechanism can also be generalized to the redirection of standard input. One could type: 
Sda<&fdb 


to cause both file descriptors fda and fdb to be associated with the same input file; if fda or fdb 
is not specified, file descriptor 0 is assumed. Such input redirection is useful for commands 
that use two or more input sources. Another use of this notation is for sequential reading and 
processing of a file; see merge in §6 for an example of use of this feature. 


5.7 Conditional Substitution 


Normally, the shell replaces occurrences of $variable by the string value assigned to variable, if 
any. However, there exists a special notation to allow conditional substitution, dependent upon 
whether the variable is set and/or not null. By definition, a variable is set if it has ever been 
assigned a value. The value of a variable can be the null string, which may be assigned to a 
variable in any one of the following ways: 

A= 

bed="" 

Ef g=’’ 

set Poe wn 


The first three of these examples assign the null string to each of the corresponding shell vari- 
ables. The last example sets the first and second positional parameters to the null string, and 
unsets all other positional parameters. 


The following conditional expressions depend upon whether a variable is set and not null (note 
that, in these expressions, variable refers to either a digit or a variable name and the meaning of 
braces differs from that described in §3.4.2 and §4.4.7): 


$ {variable : -string} If variable is set and is non-null, then substitute the value $variable in 
place of this expression. Otherwise, replace the expression with string. 
Note that the value of variable is not changed by the evaluation of this 
expression. 


$ {variable : =string} If variable is set and is non-null, then substitute the value $variable in 
place of this expression; otherwise, set variable to string, and then sub- 
stitute the value $variable in place of this expression. Positional 
parameters may not be assigned values in this fashion. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial ee 


$ {variable : ?string} If variable-is set and is non-null, then substitute the value of variable 
for the expression; otherwise, print a message of the form: 


variable: _ string 


and exit from the current shell. (If the shell is the login shell, it is 
not exited.) If string is omitted in this form, then the message: 


variable: parameter null or not set 
is printed instead. 


$ {variable :+string} If variable is set and is non-null, then substitute string for this expres- 
sion, otherwise, substitute the null string. Note that the value of vari- 
able is not altered by the evaluation of this expression. 


These expressions may also be used without the colon (:), in which case the shell does not 
check whether variable is null or not; it only checks whether variable has ever been set. 


The two examples below illustrate the use of this facility: 


1. If PATH has ever been set and is not null, then keep its current value; otherwise, set it 
to the string :/bin:/usr/bin. Note that one needs an explicit assignment to set 
PATH in this form: 


PATH=${PATH:-’:/bin:/usr/bin’ } 


2. If HOME is set and is not null, then change directory to it, otherwise set it to the given 
value and change directory to it; note that HOME is automatically assigned a value in this 
case: 

ed ${HOME:=’/usr/gas’ } 
5.8 Invocation Flags 


There are four flags that may be specified on the command line invoking the shell; these flags 
may not be turned on via the set command: 


-i If this flag is specified, or if the shell’s input and output are both attached to a termi- 
nal, the shell is interactive. In such a shell, INTERRUPT (signal 2) is caught and 
ignored, while QUIT (signal 3) and SOFTWARE TERMINATION (signal 15) are 
ignored. 


-s If this flag is specified or if no input/output redirection arguments are given, the shell 
reads commands from standard input. Shell output is written to file descriptor 2. 
The shell you get upon logging into the system effectively has the -s flag turned on. 


-c When this flag is turned on, the shell reads commands from the first string following 
the flag. Remaining arguments are ignored. Double quotes should be used to 
enclose a multi-word string, in order to allow for variable substitution. 


-r When this flag is specified on invocation, then the restricted shell is invoked. This is a 
version of the shell in which certain actions are disallowed. In particular, the cd 
command produces an error message, and the user cannot set PATH. See sh(1) fora 
more detailed description. 


28 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


6. EXAMPLES OF SHELL PROCEDURES 


tae Some examples in this section are quite difficult for beginners. For ease of reference, the exam- 
ples are arranged alphabetically by name, rather than by degree of difficulty. 


copypairs: 
# usage: copypairs file1 file2 ... 
# copy filetl to file2; file3 to file4, 
while test "$2" |= "" 
do 
cp $1 $2 
shift; shift 
done 


if test “S1" ve ** 
then echo "$0: odd number of arguments" 
£+ 


Note: This procedure illustrates the use of a while loop to process a list of positional parame- 
ters that are somehow related to one another. Here a while loop is much better than a 
for loop, because you can adjust the positional parameters via shift to handle related 


arguments. 
copyto: 

# usage: copyto dir file 
# copy argument files to ‘dir’, making sure that at least 
# two arguments exist and that ’dir’ is a directory 
if test $# -lt 2 
then echo "$0: usage: copyto directory file ..." 
elif test ! -d $1 
then echo "$0: $1 is not a directory"; 
else dir=$1; shift 

for eachfile 

do 

cp $eachfile $dir 

done 

fi 


Note: This procedure uses an if command with two tests in order to screen out improper 
usage. The for loop at the end of the procedure loops over all of the arguments to 
copyto but the first; the original $1 is shifted off. 


distinct: 
cd usage: distinct 
# reads standard input and reports list of alphanumeric strings 
# that differ only in case, giving lower-case form of each 


tr -cs ‘[A-Z][a-z][0-9]’ ’[\012«]° {| sort -u | 
tr ’[a-z]’ ’[a-z]’ |! sort ! uniq -d 


Note: This procedure is an example of the kind of process that is created by the left-to-right 
construction of a long pipeline. It may not be immediately obvious how this works. 
(You may wish to consult ¢r(1), sort(1), and unig(1) if you are completely unfamiliar 
with these commands.) The tr translates all characters except letters and digits into 
new-line characters, and then squeezes out repeated new-line characters. This leaves 
each string (in this case, any contiguous sequence of letters and digits) on a separate 
line. The sort command sorts the lines and emits only one line from any sequence of 
one or more repeated lines. The next tr converts everything to lower case, so that 
identifiers differing only in case become identical. The output is sorted again to bring 
such duplicates together. The unig -d prints (once) only those lines that occur more 
than once, yielding the desired list. 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 29 


The process of building such a pipeline uses the fact that pipes and files can usually be 
interchanged; the two lines below are equivalent, assuming that sufficient disk space is 
available: 


cmd1 | cmd2 | cmd3 
cmd1 > temp1; < temp1 cmd2 > temp2; < temp2 cmd3; rm templ[12] 


Starting with a file of test data on the standard input and working from left to right, each 
command is executed taking its input from the previous file and putting its output in the 
next file. The final output is then examined to make sure that it contains the expected 
result. The goal is to create a series of transformations that will convert the input to the 
desired output. As an exercise, try to mimic distinct with such a step-by-step pro- 
cess, using a file of test data containing: 


ABC: DEF/DEF 
ABC1 ABC 
Abc abc 


Although pipelines can give a concise notation for complex processes, exercise some res- 
traint, lest you succumb to the “‘one-line syndrome’’ sometimes found among users of 
especially concise languages. This syndrome often yields incomprehensible code. 


draft: 
# usage: draft file(s) 
# prints the draft (-rC3) of a document on a DASI 450 
# terminal in 12-pitch using memorandum macros (MM). 


nroff -rC3 -T450-12 -cm $* 


Note: Users often write this kind of procedure for convenience in dealing with commands that 
require the use of many distinct flags that cannot be given default values that are reason- 
able for all (or even most) users. 


edfind: 
# usage: edfind file arg 
# find the last occurrence in ‘file’ of a line whose 
# beginning matches ‘arg’, then print 3 lines (the one 
# before, the line itself, and the one after) 
ed - $1 <<! 
H 
7 °S$27?35-,+p 
! 


Note: This procedure illustrates the practice of using editor (ed) in-line input scripts into 
which the shell can substitute the values of variables. It is a good idea to turn on the H 
option of ed when embedding an ed script in a shell procedure (see ed(1)). 


edlast: 

# usage: edlast file 

# prints the last line of file, then deletes that line 

ed - $1 <<-\eof # no variable substitutions in "ed" script 
H 
$p 
$d 
w 
q 

eof 


echo Done. 


30 UNIX Shell Tutorial 


Note: This procedure contains an in-line input document or script (see §4.4.9); it also illus- 
trates the effect of inhibiting substitution by escaping a character in the eofstring (here, 
eof) of the input redirection. If this had not been done, $p and $d would have been 
treated as shell variables. 


fsplit 
# usage: fsplit file1 file2 
# read standard input and divide it into three parts: 
# append any line containing at least one letter 
# to file1, any line containing at least one digit 
# but no letters to file2, and throw the rest away 


total=0 lost=0 
while read next 


do 
total="‘*expr $total + 1*" 
case "$next" in 
*[A-Za-z]+#) 
echo "S$next" >> $1 35; 
*[0-9]«) 
echo "Snext" »> $2 ;; 
*) 
Lost=" “expr Siost:+ —1** 
esac 
done 


echo "$total lines read, $lost thrown away" 


Note: In this procedure, each iteration of the while loop reads a line from the input and 
analyzes it. The loop terminates only when read encounters an end-of-file. 


ww Don't use the shell to read a line at a time unless you must—it can be grotesquely slow (§7.2.1). 


initvars: 
# usage: . initvars 
# use carriage return to indicate "no change" 


echo "initializations? \c" 
read response 
if test "$response" = y 
then echo "PS1=\c"; read temp 
Psi=${temp:-$Ps1} 
echo "PS2=\c"; read temp 
PS2=${temp:-$PS2} 
echo "PATH=\c"; read temp 
PATH=${temp:-$PATH} 
echo "TERM=\c"; read temp 
TERM=${temp:-$TERM} 
£i 


Note: This procedure would be invoked by a user at the terminal, or as part of a .profile 
file. The assignments are effective even when the procedure is finished, because the dot 
command is used to invoke it. To better understand the dot command, invoke init- 
vars as indicated above and check the values of PS1, PS2, PATH, and TERM; then 
make initvars executable, type initvars, assigning different values to the three 
variables, and check again the values of these three shell variables after initvars ter- 
minates. It is assumed that PS1, PS2, PATH, and TERM have been exported, 
presumably by your . profile (§3.9.2, §4.1). 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 31 
merge: 

# usage: merge sre1 sre2 [ dest ] 

oa merge two files, every other line. 

# the first argument starts off the merge, 

# excess lines of the longer file are appended to 

# the end of the resultant file 

exec 4<€1 5<$2 

dest=${3-$1.m} # default destination file is named $1.m 

while true 

do 


# alternate reading from the files; 
# ‘more’ represents the file descriptor 
# of the longer file 
line <&4 >>$dest ti { more=5; break ;} 
line <&5 >>$dest |! { more=4; break ;} 
done 
# delete the last line of destination 
# file, because it is blank. 
ed - $dest <<\eof 


H 
$a 
w 
q 
eof 
while line <&$more >> $dest 
do :; done # read the remainder of the longer 


# file - the body of the ‘while’ loop 

# does nothing; the work of the loop 

# is done in the command list following 
# ‘while’ 

Note: This procedure illustrates a technique for reading sequential lines from a file or files 
without creating any sub-shells to do so. When the file descriptor is used to access a file, 
the effect is that of opening the file and moving a file pointer along until the end of the 
file is read. If the input redirections used src1 and sre2 explicitly rather than the 
associated file descriptors, this procedure would never terminate, because the first line of 
each file would be read over and over again. 


mkfiles: 
# usage: mkfiles pref [ quantity ] 
# makes ‘quantity’ (default = 5) files, named pref1, pref2, ... 
quantity=${2-5} 
224 
while test "$i" -le "$quantity" 
do 
> $1$i1 
b=" S206 81 + 1" 
done 


Note: This procedure uses input/output redirection to create zero-length files. The expr com- 
mand is used for counting iterations of the while loop. Compare this procedure with 
procedure null below. 


32 UNIX Shell Tutorial 
mmt: 

if test "$#" = 0; then cat <<\! 

Usage: "mmt [ options ] files" where "options" are: 

-a => output to terminal 

-e => preprocess input with eqn 

-t => preprocess input with tbl 

-Tst => output to STARE 

-T4014 => output to Tektronix 4014 

-Tvp => output to Versatec printer 


~ => use instead of "files" when mmt used inside a pipeline. 
Other options as required by TROFF and the MM macros. 


! 
exit 1 
£4 


PATH=’/bin:/usr/bin’; O=’-g’; o=’igcat -ph’; 


# Assumes typesetter is accessed via gcat(1) 
# If typesetter is on-line, use O0=’’; o=’"’ 
while test -n "$1" -a ! -r "$1" 
do case "$1" in 
=a) O=z’-a’3 o=’’ $3 
-Tst) O=’-g’; o=’!igcat -st’;; 
# Above line for STARE only 
-T4014) Oz" =t "= o=’Ite’s; 
-Tvp) O=’-t’; o=’ivpr -t’3; 
-e) e=’eqn’;; 
-t) £2"thbe“: 3 
-) break; ; 
*) a="$a $1"5; 
esac 
shift 
done 
5 I Leek yt 2 eae Alanis hy Bae then echo ’mmt: no input file’; exit 1; fi 
if test "SO" = ‘°-g"’; then: 2" <=f94 52 22 
d="$«" 
ff -test o Sa" SK "s then shift; oe) Ses a=“. "7s £i: 
if test -n "$f"; then f="tbl $#i"; dm’’s £i 


if test -n "$e" 
then 


£3 


if test -n "$f" 

then e=’eqn!’ 

else e="eqn $xi"; d= 
£1 


eval "$f $e troff $0 -cm $a $d $0 $x"; exit 0 


Note: This is a slightly simplified version of an actual UNIX command (although this is not the 
version included in UNIX Release 4.0). It uses many of the features available in the 
shell; if you can follow through it without getting lost, you have a good understanding of 
shell programming. Pay particular attention to the process of building a command line 
from shell variables and then using eval to execute it. 


null: 
# usage: null file 
# create each of the named files as an empty file 


for eachfile 
do 


> $eachfile 


done 


Note: This procedure uses the fact that output redirection creates the (empty) output file if that 
file does not already exist. Compare this procedure with procedure mkfiles above. 


33 

phone: 

# usage: phone initials 

# prints the phone number(s) of person with given initials 

echo ‘inits ext home’ 

gene ” SaNt 

abc 1234 999-2345 

def 2234 583-2245 

ghi 3342 988-1010 

xyZ 4567 555-1234 


! 


Note: This procedure is an example of using an in-line input document or script to maintain a 
small data base. 


writemail: 
# usage: writemail message user 
# if user is logged in, write message on terminal; 
# otherwise, mail it to user 
echo "St leo wwriitte® S32" iemata "42> 2 <i} 


Note: This procedure illustrates command grouping. The message specified by $1 is piped to 
the write command and, if write fails, to the mail command. 


7. EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT SHELL PROGRAMMING 
7.1 Overall Approach 


This section outlines strategies for writing efficient shell procedures, i.e., ones that do not waste 
resources unreasonably in accomplishing their purposes. In the authors’ opinion, the primary 
reason for choosing the shell procedure as the implementation method is to achieve a desired 
result at a minimum human cost. Emphasis should always be placed on simplicity, clarity, and 
readability, but efficiency can also be gained through awareness of a few design strategies. In 
many cases, an effective redesign of an existing procedure improves its efficiency by reducing 
its size, and often increases its comprehensibility. In any case, one should not worry about 
optimizing shell procedures unless they are intolerably slow or are known to consume a lot of 
resources. 


The same kind of iteration cycle should be applied to shell procedures as to other programs: 
write code, measure it, and optimize only the few important parts. The user should become 
familiar with the time command, which can be used to measure both entire procedures and 
parts thereof. Its use is strongly recommended; human intuition is notoriously unreliable when 
used to estimate timings of programs, even when the style of programming is a familiar one. 
Each timing test should be run several times, because the results are easily disturbed by, for 
instance, variations in system load. 


7.2 Approximate Measures of Resource Consumption 


7.2.1 Number of Processes Generated. When large numbers of short commands are exe- 
cuted, the actual execution time of the commands may well be dominated by the overhead of 
creating processes. The procedures that incur significant amounts of such overhead are those 
that perform much looping and those that generate command sequences to be interpreted by 
another shell. 


If you are worried about efficiency, it is important to know which commands are currently built 
into the shell, and which are not. Here is the alphabetical list of those that are built-in: 


34 UNIX Shell Tutorial 
break case ber oe | continue eval exec 
exit export for aio newgrp read 
readonly set shift test times trap 
ulimit umask until wait while 
Cicer 


(...) executes as a child process, i.e., the shell does a fork, but no exec. Any command not 
in the above list requires both fork and exec. 


The user should always have at least a vague idea of the number of processes generated by a 
shell procedure. In the bulk of observed procedures, the number of processes spawned (not 
necessarily simultaneously) can be described by: 


processes = k*n + ¢ 


where k and ¢ are constants, and n is the number of procedure arguments, the number of lines 
in some input file, the number of entries in some directory, or some other obvious quantity. 
Efficiency improvements are most commonly gained by reducing the value of k, sometimes to 
zero. Any procedure whose complexity measure includes n? terms or higher powers of n is 
likely to be intolerably expensive. 


As an example, here is an analysis of procedure fsplit of §6. For each iteration of the loop, 
there is one expr plus either an echo or another expr. One additional echo is executed at 
the end. If m is the number of lines of input, the number of processes is 2#n +1. On the 
other hand, the number of processes in the following (equivalent) procedure is 12, regardless 
of the number of lines of input: 


# faster fsplit 

trap ‘rm temp$$; trap 0; exit’ 0 12 3 15 

start1=0 start2=0 

b=’[A-Za-2]’ 

cat > temp$$ # read standard input into temp file 
# save original lengths of $1, $2 

if test -s "$1"; then start1=‘we -1 < $1*; £i 

if test -s "$2"; then start2=‘we -1 < $2‘; £i 

grep "$b" temp$$ >> $1 # lines with letters onto $1 

grep -v "$b" temp$$ ! grep ’[0-9]’ >> $2 
# lines with only numbers onto $2 

total="‘*we -1 < temp$$*" 

end1="‘we -1 < $1*" 

end2="‘*we -1 < $2*" 

lost="‘*expr $total - \( $end1 - $start1 \) - \( $end2 - $start2 \)*" 

echo "$total lines read, $lost thrown away" 


This version is often ten times faster than fsplit, and it is even faster for larger input files. 


Some types of procedures should not be written using the shell. For example, if one or more 
processes are generated for each character in some file, it is a good indication that the pro- 
cedure should be rewritten in C. 


wir Shell procedures should not be used to scan or build files a character at a time. 


7.2.2 Number of Data Bytes Accessed. It is worthwhile considering any action that 
reduces the number of bytes read or written. This may be important for those procedures 
whose time is spent passing data around among a few processes, rather than in creating large 
numbers of short processes. Some filters shrink their output, others usually increase it. It 
always pays to put the shrinkers first when the order is irrelevant. Which of the following is 
likely to be faster? 


sort file i grep pattern 
grep pattern file i sort 


—- 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 35 


7.2.3 Directory Searches. Directory searching can consume a great deal of time, especially 
in those applications that utilize deep directory structures and long path names. Judicious use 
of cd can help shorten long path names and thus reduce the number of directory searches 
needed. As an exercise, try the following commands (on a fairly quiet system):® 


time sh -c ’1ls -l /usr/bin/+* >/dev/null’ 
time sh -c ’cd /usr/bin; 1s -1 * >/dev/null’ 


7.3 Efficient Organization 


7.3.1 Directory-Search Order and the PATH Variable. The PATH variable is a convenient 
mechanism for allowing organization and sharing of procedures. However, it must be used ina 
sensible fashion, or the result may be a great increase in system overhead that occurs in a sub- 
tle, but avoidable, way. 


The process of finding a command involves reading every directory included in every path 
name that precedes the needed path name in the current PATH variable. As an example, con- 
sider the effect of invoking nroff (ie, /usr/bin/nroff) when $PATH is 
:/bin:/usr/bin. The sequence of directories read is: ., /, /bin, /, /usr, and 
/usr/bin, i.e., a total of six directories. A long path list assigned to PATH can increase this 
number significantly. 


The vast majority of command executions are of commands found in /bin and, to a somewhat 
lesser extent, in /usr/bin. Careless PATH setup may lead to a great deal of unnecessary 
searching. The following four examples are ordered from worst to best (but only with respect 
to the efficiency of command searches): 


:/al/t£/jtb/bin:/usr/lbin:/bin:/usr/bin 
:/bin:/a1l/t£/jtb/bin:/usr/lbin:/usr/bin 
:/bin:/usr/bin:/al/tf/jtb/bin:/usr/lbin 
/bin::/usr/bin:/a1/t£/jtb/bin:/usr/lbin 


The first one above should be avoided. The others are acceptable, the choice among them is 
dictated by the rate of change in the set of commands kept in /bin and /usr/bin. 


A procedure that is expensive because it invokes many short-lived commands may often be 
speeded up by setting the PATH variable inside the procedure such that the fewest possible 
directories are searched in an optimum order; the mmt example in §6 does this. 


7.3.2 Good Ways to Set up Directories. It is wise to avoid directories that are larger than 
necessary. You should be aware of several magic sizes. A directory that contains entries for up 
to 30 files (plus the required . and ..) fits in a single disk block and can be searched very 
efficiently. One that has up to 286 entries is still a small file; anything larger is usually a disaster 
when used as a working directory. It is especially important to keep login directories small, 
preferably one block at most. Note that, as a rule, directories never shrink. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The UNIX shell was initially written by S. R. Bourne [2,3]. Its design is based, in part, on the 
original UNIX shell [15] and on the PWB/UNIX shell [12], some features having been taken 
from both. Similarities also exist with the command interpreters of the Cambridge Multiple 
Access System and of the MIT Compatible Time-Sharing System. T. E. Fritz and several other 
colleagues provided helpful comments during the writing of this tutorial; T. A. Dolotta, in addi- 
tion, provided a great deal of editorial assistance. 


8. You may have to do some reading in the UNIX User’s Manual [7] to understand exactly what is going on in these 


examples. 


36 


UNIX Shell Tutorial 


REFERENCES 


(1) 


[2] 


[3] 
[4] 


[5] 


[6] 


[7] 


[8] 


[9] 


[10] 
[11] 


[12] 
[13] 


[14] 


[15] 


Bianchi, M. H., and Wood, J. L. A User’s Viewpoint on the Programmer’s Workbench. Proc. 
Second Int. Conf. on Software Engineering, pp. 193-99 (Oct. 13-15, 1976). 


Bourne, S. R. The UNIX Shell. The Bell System Technical Journal, Vol. 57, No. 6, Part 2, pp. 
1971-90 (July-Aug. 1978). 


Bourne, 8. R. An Introduction to the UNIX Shell. Bell Laboratories (1979). 


Dolotta, T. A., Haight, R. C., and Mashey, J.R. The Programmer’s Workbench. The Bell System 
Technical Journal, Vol. 57, No. 6, Part 2, pp. 2177-200 (July-Aug. 1978). 


Dolotta, T. A., and Mashey, J. R. An Introduction to the Programmer’s Workbench. Proc. Second 
Int. Conf. on Software Engineering, pp. 164-68 (Oct. 13-15, 1976). 


Dolotta, T. A., and Mashey, J. R. Using a Command Language as the Primary Programming Tool. 
In: Beech, D. (ed.), Command Language Directions (Proc, of the Second IFIP Working Conf. on 
Command Languages), pp. 35-55. Amsterdam: North Holland (1980). 


Dolotta, T. A., Olsson, S. B., and Petruccelli, A. G., eds. UNIX User’s Manual—Release 3.0. Bell 
Laboratories (June 1980). 


Kernighan, B. W., and Mashey, J. R. The UNIX Programming Environment. COMPUTER, 
Vol. 14, No.4, pp. 12-24 (April 1981); an earlier version of this paper was published in 
Software— Practice & Experience, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 1-15 (Jan. 1979). 


Kernighan, B. W., and Plauger, P. J. Software Tools. Proc. First Nat. Conf. on Software Engineer- 
ing, pp. 8-13 (Sept. 11-12, 1975). 


Kernighan, B. W., and Plauger, P. J. Software Tools. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley (1976). 


Kernighan, B. W., and Ritchie, D. M. The C Programming Language. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall (1978). 


Mashey, J. R. PWB/UNIX Shell Tutorial. Bell Laboratories (1977). 


Ritchie, D. M., and Thompson, K. The UNIX Time-Sharing System. The Bell System Technical 
Journal, Vol. 57, No. 6, Part 2, pp. 1905-29 (July-Aug. 1978). 


Snyder, G. A., and Mashey, J. R. UNIX Documentation Road Map. Bell Laboratories (January 
1981). 


Thompson, K. The UNIX Command Language. In: Structured Programming— Infotech State of the 
Art Report, pp. 375-84. Infotech International Limited, Nicholson House, Maidenhead, Berkshire, 
England (1976). 


January 1981 


