6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


5. SETTING UP THE UNIX SYSTEM (3B20S) 
GENERAL 


This section describes the load, update, and configuration procedures involved in installing a UNIX operat- 
ing system on the 3B20S Processor. It is meant to be used both as an installation guide and as a reference docu- 
ment for configuration details. 


A. Prerequisites 


Before attempting to generate a UNIX system, the system administrator should understand that a consider- 
able knowledge of the related documentation is required and assumed. In particular, the administrator should 
be very familiar with the following documents: 


e UNIX System User’s Guide 


e UNIX System User’s Manual 


e UNIX System Administrator’s Manual 
e UNIX System Operations Guide 
e All sections in the UNIX System Administrator's Guide. 


Throughout this section, each reference of the form name(1M), name(7), or name(8) refers to entries in 
the UNIX System Administrator’s Manual. All other references to entries of the form name(N), where “N” 
is a number (1 through 6) possibly followed by a letter, refer to entry name in section N of the UNIX System 
User’s Manual. eS 


The system administrator must have a basic understanding of the operation of the hardware. This includes 
the operation of the Emergency Action Interface (EAI) and the tape and disk drives. It is required that disk 
drive 0 and tape drive 0 be configured at the standard device locations. It is also assumed that the hardware 
works and has been completely installed. The minimal hardware configuration must be fully functional. Appro- 
priate diagnostics should have been run to verify this. Once the system is installed, the on-line UNIX system 
diagnostics can be used to verify the remaining hardware. A detailed description of the entire hardware configu- 
ration is needed, including memory type, controller channel and device addresses, peripheral controller slots, 
and moving head disk locations. This information is necessary to generate a UNIX operating system. 


B. Procedure 


The UNIX operating system is distributed on several magnetic tapes, recorded in 9-track format at 1600 
bpi. Distribution tapes will be marked “8B20S”(for simplex processors) or “38B20D” (for duplex processors). Be 
sure to have the correct tapes for your processor. 


Initial Load 


The initial load program (on Tape 0) will copy the root file system (on Tape 1) from tape drive 0 to disk drive 
0. The destination disk pack can also be formatted at this time. [See 3B20boot(8).] Once the root file system 
has been successfully loaded to disk, the UNIX system may be booted and the available utility programs used 
to complete the installation. 


Update 
The update procedures are to be used only on releases that are designated as update releases. The epio(1) 


program is used to perform all updates. The cpio program will not update any file if its replacement has a modi- 
fication time that is less than (i.e., earlier than) the modification time of the original file. Certain administrative 


Page 67 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


files (e.g., etc/passwd) are sent with a modification time of January 1, 1970, to ensure that they do not replace 
their counterparts during updates. Any file not copied will cause epio to print a message to that effect. These 
messages should always be investigated to ensure that any files not copied were of that type. However, note 
that depending on respective modification times, a locally-modified file may get updated, thus destroying the 
local modifications. 


One of the most common problems that arise during an installation is running out of disk space when vr @® 
forming an update. Should this condition occur, the original contents of the file system should be restored from 

a backup copy and the contents of the update tape should be read into a spare file system using the epio pro- 
gram. Unwanted material can then be removed and the original file system can be updated from this new file 
system using the —pdm options of cpio. 


LOAD PROCEDURES 


A. Distribution Tape Format & 


Tape 0 contains the load-tape-to-disk program and the selectable items. Tape 1 contains a physical copy of 
the root file system. Root refers to the directory “/”, which is the root of all the directory trees. 


The root (/) file system contains the following directories: 


bek: Directory used to mount a backup file system for file restoring. 

bin: Public commands; described in paragraph 1 of the UNIX System User’s Manual and the 
UNIX System Administrator’s Manual. 

dgn: Directory used for on-line diagnostics. 

dey: Special files, all the devices on the system. s 

ete: Administrative programs and files. 

firm: Directory used for peripheral controller pump code. 

lib: Public libraries, parts of the assembler, C compiler. 

lost+found: Directory used by fsck(1M) for disconnected files. 

tmp: Directory used for temporary files; should be cleaned at reboot in /etc/re. 

usr: Directory used to mount the /usr file system. 


B. Initial Load of Root & 


Mount Tape 0 on drive 0 and position it at the load point. This tape contains the load-tape-to-disk program 
and is used to bring in the root file system. The program is loaded into memory by using the LDTAPE command 
on the EAT. Once loaded, the tape will rewind; and a PRM will be issued requesting Tape 1. Mount Tape 1 (con- 
taining the root file system) on drive 0 and enter another LDTAPE command on the EAI. After the copy is 
complete, the tape will rewind; and the system can be booted using the BOOT command on the EAI. This will 
load the minimal configuration system delivered with the release. [See ldtape(8), 3B20boot(8), eai(8), and 
3B20o0ps(8).| Once the system is up, check [using fsck(1M)] the root file system and browse through it. 


At this time, you should save a copy of the root file system on the backup root file system section of drive 
0. In the event that the normal root file system is later corrupted to the point that it cannot be booted, the backup 
copy can be booted and the normal file system repaired. To make the copy, enter the command: 


voleopy root /dev/rdsk0 pkname /dev/rdsk7 pkname eS 


Page 68 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE 


where pkname is the volume name you have assigned to the pack. This procedure should be performed periodi- 
Peg cally or after substantial changes have been made to the root file system (administrative files, new commands, 
etc.). 


C. Update of Root 
If this release is specifically designated as an update release, the following instructions should be followed. 


It is very important that the system be running in single-user mode during the update phase. To update 
an already existing root file system, Tape 3 (supplied only on update releases) will be used. Tape 3 contains two 
files—a copy of the cpio program and a epio version of the root file system. It is necessary to first make a copy 
of the root file system using voleopy(1M), and then update this copy. The copy should be made on a separate 
disk pack using the same section number as the root file system (always section 0). Also, after the update is 
completed, check if any of the local administrative files in the directory /etc need modification. Most of these 

oe are mentioned in "ADMINISTRATIVE FILES". 


Mount Tape 3 on drive 0 and position it at the load point. It is assumed that disk drive 1 is available for 
making the copy and that the root file system is on /dev/dsk0. The following procedure will first make a copy 
of the root file system, and then update this copy. Note that /dev/tp0n refers to tape drive 0 but has the side 
effect of spacing forward to the next end-of-file (no rewind option). 


don mhd 1 
volcopy root /dev/rdsk0 pknamel /dev/rdsk10 pkname2 
fsck /dev/rdsk10 
mount /dev/dsk10 /bck 
ep /dev/tp0n /bek/bin/cpio 
chmod 755 /bek/bin/cpio 
chown bin /bek/bin/epio 
& ed /bck 
dd if=/dev/rtp0 bs=2048 | /bck/bin/cpio —idm 
cd / 
umount /dev/dsk10 
fsck /dev/rdsk10 
doff mhd 1 


Pknamel and pkname2 are the volume names of the source and destination disk packs, respectively. If the new 
copy is satisfactory, shut down and halt the system, change disk packs, and reboot the system using the new 
root. 


D. Tape 2 (/usr) Format 
& Tape 2 contains the /usr file system in epio format (2048 byte records). The /usr file system contains com- 
mands and files that must be available (mounted) when the system is in multiuser mode. The tape contains the 


following directories: 


adm: Miscellaneous administrative command and data files including the connect-time account- 
ing file wtmp and the process accounting file pacct. 


ec bin: Public commands; an overflow for /bin. 
dict: Dictionaries for word processing programs. 
games: Various demonstration and instructional programs. 


Page 69 


er ee eas 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


include: Public C language #inelude files. 


lib: Archive libraries including the text processing macros; also contains data files for various 
programs, such as cron(1M), uuep(1C), and those in the LP Spooling System. 


mail: Mail directory. , Be 


lost+found: Directory used by fsek(1M) for disconnected files. 

news: Place for all the various system news; see news(1). 

pub: Handy public information, e.g., table of ASCII characters. 

spool: Spool directory for daemons. & 
sre: Source for commands, libraries, the system, etc. 

tmp: Directory for temporary files; should be cleaned at reboot. 


E. Initial Load of /usr 


Mount Tape 2 on drive 0 and position it at the load point. Mount a file system (device) as /usr. The ultimate 
size and location of this file system on a device is an administrative decision; initially, the following procedure 
will suffice. If /usris placed elsewhere, /ete/checklist and /etc/filesave must reflect the change. 


mkfs /dev/rdsk1 90000 gap blocks 

# See mkfs(1M) for appropriate parameters. = 
labelit /dev/rdskl usr pkname 

fsck /dev/rdsk1 

mount /dev/dsk1 /usr 

chmod 775 /usr 

ed /usr 

dd if=/dev/rtp0 bs=2048 | cpio —idm 


Pkname is the volume name of the pack (e.g., “p0001”). 


Because /usr must be mounted when the system is in multiuser mode, the file /ete/re must be changed to 
include the command lines to mount and unmount the file systems in single-user and multiuser modes. These 
lines must be inserted at the appropriate places in /etc/rc, as indicated by comments in the prototype file. Next, 
the file /ete/checklist should be changed to include the file system device (e.g., /dev/rdsk1). [See fsck(1M), 
labelit on voleopy(1M), mkfs(1M), mount(1M), and checklist(4).| The supplied system already contains the 
entries for root and usr on /dev/dsk0 and /dev/dsk1, respectively. 


F. Update of /usr 
If this release is specifically designated as an update release, the following instructions should be used. 
The system should be running in single-user mode during the update phase. First, make a copy of the is 


file system for backup purposes. Next, mount Tape 2 on drive 0 and position it at the load point. The /usr file 
system must also be mounted. The following procedure will perform the update: 


ed /usr 
dd if=/dev/rtp0 bs=2048 | cpio —idm & 


Page 70 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


G. Initial Load or Update of Selectable Items 


The initial load and update procedures are essentially the same; the only exception being the creation of 
the selectable item directory on the initial load. 


Mount Tape 0 on drive 0 and position it at the load point. Make sure that the /usr file system is mounted. 
The following procedure will read in the source for each of the selectable subsystems. If a particular subsystem 
is not desired, simply skip that file on the tape by executing the following command: 


echo </dev/rtp0n 


The tape can be rewound after any subsystem by specifying /dev/rtp0 instead of /dev/rtpOn. First, skip over 
the load-tape-to-disk program: 


& echo </dev/rtp0n 
Any of the following subsystems may be skipped by executing 
echo </dev/rtp0n 
in lieu of the instructions shown below. 
Next, install the manual pages by: 


cd /usr 
mkdir man; chown bin man; chgrp bin man; chmod 775 man 


ed man 
& dd if=/dev/rtp0n bs=2048 | epio —idm 
Next, install the Remote Job Entry source by: 
ed /usr/sre/emd 
mkdir rje; chown bin rje; chgrp bin rje; chmod 775 rje 
cd rje 
dd if=/dev/rtp0n bs=2048 | cpio ~idm 
Finally, install the on-line machine readable documents by: 
ed /usr 
mkdir docs; chown bin docs; chgrp bin docs; chmod 775 docs 
ee cd docs 


dd if=/dev/rtp0n bs=2048 | cpio —idm 


To complete the installation of the rje subsystem, the software must be built and installed. (Execute the 
command for the subsystem that you have elected to take.) 


To build and install rje, change the working directory to /usr/sre and execute one of the following :mkemd 


& lines: 
ARGS=" rjel " 


./:mkemd rje # makes a single RJE system 
ARGS= "rje2" ./:mkemd rje # makes rjel and rje2 
ARGS=" rje3" ./:mkemd rje # makes rjel, rje2, and rje3 
ARGS=" rje4 " ./:mkemd rje # makes rjel through rje4 


See rje(8) and the “UNIX SYSTEM REMOTE JOB ENTRY” section for additional information. 


Page 71 


NSS er ee ce ema ee ee Te en Ra ee ee 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


Install the nusend software by: 


ed /usr/sre/emd - 

mkdir nusend 

chown bin nusend 

chgrp bin nusend 

chmod 775 nusend 

cd nusend 

dd if=/dev/rtp0n bs=2048 | cpio —idm 


To complete the installation of the nusend subsystem, the software must be built and installed. To build and 
install nusend, change the working directory to /usr/sre and execute the following command line: 


:mkemd nusend & 


CONFIGURATION PLANNING 


A. UNIX System Configuration 


The basic UNIX operating system supplied supports only the console, a disk controller (disk drive 0 and 1), 
and a tape controller (tape drive 0). You must describe your actual configuration. 


The UNIX operating system source code and object libraries are in /usr/sre/uts. The configuration informa- 
tion is kept in the directory /usr/src/uts/3b/cf. There is only one file that must be changed to reflect the system 
configuration, /ete/system. As supplied, this file describes the minimal configuration of hardware and software. 
Your specific configuration will require that changes be made to this file. See config(1M) for more information. 


B. Special Files 


In addition to the configuration file, special device files are necessary to communicate with the hardware 
and software devices that are configured. A special file is the interface between the file system and the operating 
system. It establishes a connection between an arbitrary pathname, such as /dev/tty12, and the actual device 
handling routines in the operating system that controls the physical device. Normally, all special files are lo- 
cated in the directory /dev. 


Special files are of two types—block and character. This is indicated by the character bor c in the listing 
produced by Is(1) with the —1 option. Block type devices use the system buffer pool to improve throughput and 
minimize I/O traffic. Character devices either work directly to user processes without buffering or perform 
their own specialized form of buffering. 


In addition, each special file has a major device number and a minor device number. The major device num- ee 
ber refers to the device type and is used as an index into either the bdevsw or cdevsw table in the configuration 


file conf.c. The minor device number is used by the corresponding driver to identify a particular subdevice, chan- 
nel or option and is therefore device dependent. Major device numbers are permanently assigned as shown in 


Table 5.A. 


Page 72 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE 


TABLE 5.A 
© 
oT 
un52 /dev/tp* 
ol 


/dev/console 
/dev/dgn/* 
/dev/mem 
/dev/tty 
/dev/osm* 


dgn 
memory 
systty 

osm 


UPON eS 


error /dev/error 
profile 6 /dev/prf 
mhd 7 /dev/rdsk* 
unb2 8 /dev/rtp* 
tn74 /dev/tty* 
trace /dev/trace 
vpm /dev/vpm* 
unb53 /dev/unbd3.* 
tn75 /dev/tn75.* 
tn&82 /dev/tn82.* 
& acu /dev/acu* 
tn85 /dev/|p* 
st /dev/sp*, /dev/tty* 
x25 /dev/x25/s* 
ne /dev/ne 
stc /dev/st* 


/dev/emt* 
/dev/emc* 
/dev/tty* 
/dev/nsec* 
/dev/un56, /dev/acu* 


em 
emc 
tn4 
nsc 
un56 


The procedure for calculating minor device numbers is included in the specification description for each de- 
vice. The program mknod(1M) is used to create special files. It binds the pathname to a device type, major and 
minor device number. For example, the following would create part of the initially supplied /dev directory: 


cd /dev 
mknod console c 0 0 
& mknod error c 5 0 
mknod mem ¢ 2 0; mknod kmem c 2 1; mknod null ¢ 2 2 
mknod tty ¢ 30 
mknod dsk0 b 0 0; mknod rdsk0 ¢ 7 0 


mknod tp0 b 1 2; mknod rtp0 ¢ 7 2 
ee “mknod tp0n b 1 66; mknod rtp0n c 6 66 


Page 73 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


After the special files have been made, their access modes should be changed to appropriate values by 
chmod(1). For example: ee 


ed /dev 

chmod 622 console 

chmod 444 error 

chmod 440 mem kmem & 
chmod 666 null ’ 
chmod 666 tty 

chmod 600 dsk0 rdsk0 


chmod 666 tp0 rtp0 
chmod 666 tp0n rtp0n 


device numbers are important. However, many programs expect that a particular file name refers to a certain 


Note that names of special files have no meaning to the operating system itself; only the major and minor @ 
device. Thus, by convention, special files are named according to the /dev entry field in Table 5.A. 


6697 


For those devices with a /devname ending in “*”, this character is replaced by a string of digits representing 


the minor device number. For example: 
mknod /dev/tty03 ¢ 1 3 
C. System Description File 


The system description file, /etc/system, is used to specify the operating system configuration. The first 
part of the file lists all of the hardware devices on the system. Next, various system information is listed. Refer 
to system(4) for an explanation of the abbreviations used and the format of each entry. The supplied version 
of /etc/system should also be used as a guide. & 


The command sysdef(1M) can be used to reconstruct a system file from a /unix file. It can also be used 
to verify that changes made to /etc/system are included in the new operating system file. 


D. Hardware Configuration 


Every hardware device on the system must be identified for both operating system and diagnostic purposes. 
Each peripheral is addressed by a channel and device location (IOPs and DFCs) or by a previously defined device 
and a given slot or drive location (PCs and MIDs). In addition, each peripheral is assigned a unit number to 
simplify identification. This number is encoded in the minor device number of special files. The remaining infor- 
mation is used only for diagnostic purposes. Unless otherwise stated, these values (mt, mv, hv, and equip) should 


be entered as 0. & 
DFC— Disk File Controller 

The entry for dfe specifies the location of the Disk File Controllers (DFCs) on the system. Unit 0 must refer 
to the primary controller; channel 11, device 0. The value for equip must be 3. 


MHD—Moving Head Disk 


The entry for mhd specifies the location of a disk drive on its controller. It must appear after the controlling 
DFC entry and before any other device specification. Units 0 and 1 are reserved for drives 0 and 1 on DFC 0 

and must not be changed. The equip field must be four if the drive is manufactured by Control Data or six if 

it is manufactured by Ampex. 


Every disk is partitioned into 16 logical sections defined in Table 5.B. ae) 


Page 74 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE 


TABLE 5.B 


starting starting number number of maximum normal 
block cylinder of blocks cylinders size fs usage 


608 494304 60800 
61408 433504 é 91200 
152608 342304 ns 45600 
198208 296704 91200 
289408 205504 oe 45600 
335008 159904 5 91200 
426208 68704 44992 
471200 : 23712 of 23712 
0 495520 495520 
0 
28576 
494912 
0 : 495520 reserved 
0 495520 reserved 
1) 955 : 495520 reserved 
0 495520 reserved 


0 
1 
Z 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 


As can be seen from Table 5.B, most sections run to the end of the disk. It is therefore possible for file sys- 
tems placed on various sections to destructively interfere with one another. The “maximum size fs” column gives 
the largest size file system on a given section before it will run into the next logical section. If the file system 
is larger than this size, the next section must not be used. 


Up to 16 disks can be configured into a system. The mknod(1M) command is used to make the special files 
required to access the disks and subsections. From the previous table defining the major device numbers, it is 
seen that the major device number for disks is 0 when used as a block device and 7 when used as a character 
device. The minor device number specifies the disk and section according to the formula: 

minor = 16 * unit + section 


Thus, to make the special files for drive 3, section 5, one would enter: 


mknod /dev/dsk35 b 0 53 
mknod /dev/rdsk35 ¢ 7 58 


In general, disk modes should be 600, owned by root. 
1OP—1/O Processor 

The entry for iop specifies the location of the I/O processors on the system. Up to 16 Peripheral Controllers 
(PCs) can be configured on an IOP. PC definitions must follow the IOP on which they reside. IOP unit 0 must 
refer to channel 11, device 2. The value for equip must be 2 


™N83— Console Interface 


The entry for tn&83 specifies the console interface for the system. The minor device number specifies the ter- 
minal interface (minor 0) or the printer interface (minor 1). The modes should be 622, owned by root. 


Page 75 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


UN52/UN32— 1600 BPI Tape Controllers 

The entry for un52 or un32specifies the location of the magnetic tape controllers on the system. Up to four 
tape drives can be connected to a controller. The un32supports the Kennedy 25 IPS tension arm drive; the un52 
supports the Cipher 125 IPS vacuum column drive. Normally, the first drive on a controller is assigned subdevice 
2. The minor device number identifies the controller, subdevice, and rewind option for each drive according to 
the formula: 


minor = 4 * controller + subdevice + 64 (if no rewind) 


“No rewind” implies that when the tape drive is closed the drive will not rewind back to load point but position 
itself at the beginning of the next tape file. 


For example, the block type special file for /dev/tp1n which is on controller 1, subdevice 2, and will not re- 
wind when closed would be made by: 


mknod /dev/tpInb270 #1*4+2+ 64 
Tape modes should be 666, owned by root. 


Note: Since the un32 and und2 have the same major device numbers, only one or the other may be 
configured into a system. The special files /dev/tp* represent the configured controller. 


T™N4/TN74— Asynchronous Terminal Interfaces 
The entry for tn4 or tn74 specifies the location of an asynchronous terminal interface on the system. Each 
tnd interface controls eight 1200 baud subdevices; each tn74 interface controls two 9600 baud subdevices. For 
tn4, the minor device number is calculated according to the formula: 
minor = 8 * unit + subdevice 
For tn74, the minor device number is calculated according to the formula: 
minor = 2 * unit + subdevice 
UN53— General Purpose Synchronous Interface 
The entry for un53 specifies the location of the dual-board, general purpose synchronous interface consist- 
ing of a TN82 and a UN53 Peripheral Controller. The UN53 contains the USARTs and programmable memory. 
It is driven by the TN82 which contains the control memory and microprocessor. This TN82 contains different 
control memory than the TN82 used for X25 communication. Because of the possibility of confusion, the general 


purpose synchronous interface is specified as a UN53 even though the slot number specified is that of the TN&2. 


Each unit can support four subdevices (¢.g., four RJE connections). The minor device number is calculated 
according to the formula: 


minor = 4 * unit + subdevice 
The modes should be 600 owned by the subsystem (e.g., rje) that will use the device. 
ACU—TN75 Automatic Call Unit Interface 


The entry for acu specifies the location of the TN75 Automatic Call Units on the system. The minor device 
number for each call unit is the same as the unit number. The modes should be 222 and owned by root. 


Page 76 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE 


UN56— Automatic Call Unit Interface 


The entry for un56 specifies the location of an ACU interface on the system. Each un56 interface controls 
eight ACU ports, each of which may be configured in a nonsharing arrangement or a sharing arrangement. In 
a nonsharing arrangement, the port is attached to an ACU that has a single data set attached to it. In a sharing 
arrangement, the port is attached to a single ACU that can dial out on up to 12 data sets. The wn56 acts as a 
control device to specify the configuration to the hardware. The minor device number of the und6 is 255. The 
mode should be 600 and owned by root. 


The acu entries specify the locations of the dial-out lines. The minor device number for a call-out line is a 
number between 0 and 254. The connections between minor devices and lines are specified with the acuset(1M) 
command. The modes should be 222 and owned by root. 


TN85—Line Printer Interface 


The entry for tn85 specifies the location of the medium-speed line printer controllers on the system. Hach 
controller can support two printers at 1000 lines per minute or one at 2000 lines per minute. The minor device 
is calculated according to the formula: 


minor = 2 * unit + subdevice 
The modes should be 200, owned by Ip. 
TN82 and TN75— X25 Devices 


The X25 driver provides multiplexed channels (“permanent virtual circuits”, also known as PVCs) over one 
or more synchronous communication lines using the Bell System standard BX.25 Level 3 communication proto- 
col. Each X25 minor device can be associated with an arbitrary logical channel number (1 through 4095) on any 
one of some configurable number of multiplexed communication lines. A separate BX.25 Level 3 interface (link) 
is provided for each physical communication line. 


The X25 driver is implemented using the Common Synchronous Interface (CSI). The X25 driver uses the 
CSI interface to access communication lines controlled by the TN75 and TN82 Peripheral Controller (PC) 
boards. Level 2 of BX.25 (the link level) is implemented in firmware on these PCs. 


The X25 interfaces are installed as follows: 


1. Generate a system. The configuration file used for the system generation must contain lines of the form: 


tn75 unit_# pe_/ 0 0 0 2 


tng2 unit_/ pe_# 0 0 0 2 


where tn75/tn82 refer to the hardware in the system used to support X25, unit_/ is the unit number as- 
signed to the device, and pc_/ is the pe slot number in the iop controller where the board is located. Note 
that is unique for a particular type of device only. This means that there could be a tn75 unit 1 and a tn82 
unit 1. The difference between these two boards is that the tn82 will work up to 56 KB but will drive only 
one line while the tn75 will only work up to 9.6 KB but is able to drive two lines. Next there must be a 
line in the system configuration file of the form: 
x20 n 

‘ where “n” is the number of X25 minor devices desired. The configuration file must also contain a line 
for the ne (network control) driver, which is used to install, monitor, and control permanent virtual cir- 
cuits. This line has the following form: 


ne 1 


Page 77 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


If more than one synchronous communication line is to be accessed via the X25 driver, the configuration 
file must also contain a line of the form: 


x25links m 


where “m” is the number of synchronous lines (and thus the number of X25 interfaces) to be accessed 
via the X25 driver. If the X25 trace capability is to be used, the VPM trace driver must be configured. 


2. Special files must be created for each X25 minor device, and each TN75 and/or TN82 minor device: 


/ete/mknod /dev/x25/s? c 18 ? 
/etc/mknod /dev/tn75.? c 18 ? 
/ete/mknod /dev/tn82.? c 14 ? 


The “?” is replaced by a number between 0 and “n”. For a tn75, there should be a special device for each 
port so “n” will be two times the number of tn75 configured since there are two ports per device. For a & 
tn82, “n” will be the number of tn82 configured since there is only one port per card. N for X25 special 


device is the number of PVC the user wants. There must also be a node for the ne driver: 


/ete/mknod /dev/ne c 19 0 
where “W” is the major device number of the ne driver. 


3. Modify the /ete/re file so that it executes x25pve(1C) to associate each x25 minor device with a particu- 
lar link and logical channel number and x25lnk(1C) to associate each link with a particular line on a 
tn75 and/or tn82 and then to start the device. An example of these commands which could be added to 
/etc/re are shown below: 


/etc/x25pve —i —S —m /dev/x25/s01 —c 1-1 1 
/ete/x25Ink —a —m /dev/tn75.0 ~1 0 
/ete/x25Ink —a —m /dev/tn82.1 —1 1 
/ete/x25lnk —i —1 0 

/etc/x25lnk —i —b —1 1 


/ete/x25pve —i —S —m /dev/x25/s00 —e 1-10 


In the above example, the first two lines install two PVCs and attach /dev/x25/s00 to channel 1 of link 
0 and /dev/x25/s01 to channel 1 of link 1. The next two lines assign link numbers to particular hardware 
ports. Hardware ports on a tn75 are assigned such that port 0 and 1 are on unit number 0, ports 2 and 
3 are unit number 1, etc. Port numbers on tn82 equal the unit number of the board because tn82’s only 
have one port on them. The final two commands start the protocol on the links just attached. Note that 
the —b option used in the command indicates that this link will be address b. 


There are several other configuration parameters associated with the X25 driver: 


1. x25bytes: the amount of external buffer space (in bytes) available to the X25 driver. The maximum allow- 
able value for x25bytes is 128K. 


2. x25bufs: the number of X25 buffer descriptors allocated. 


The default values for these parameters are adequate for 16 minor devices. If substantially more or less than 
that number of minor devices is configured, it may be desirable to adjust these values. 


A simple formula may be used to calculate an approximation of the maximum number of buffer descriptors 
that will be used: 


(4 * number_x25links) + (8 * number_x25minor_devices) & 


Page 78 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


A formula may also be used to calculate an approximation of the maximum amount of x25 buffer space need- 
ed. This value depends on the packet size to be used on each link. 


For each link: 

4 * packetsize 

8 * packetsize * number_x25minor_devices 
Add the values for all the links. 


If the amounts configured are too small, requests for a buffer descriptor and buffer will be denied until the space 
is freed. 


The number of buffer descriptors and the amount of buffer space in use at any one time depends on the ap- 
plications running X25 and the activity on each link. Usually, it will not be necessary to configure the maximum 
values. 

NSCI—NSC Devices 
The NSCI is the 3B20S Processor interface to the NSC Hyperchannel, To install the NSC system software: 


1. The special file /dev/nsc* must be created as a character special device with read and write permissions 
for group daemon. 


2. Modify the /etc/re file so that it executes /etc/nscmon ~—start all& (after the /usr file system has been 
mounted). 


3. Modify the /etc/shutdown file so that it executes /etc/nscmon ~—stop all. 
4. Add **NSC** entries to the /etc/passwd and /etc/group files. 
5. Create the file /etc/nsc which specifies the network topology: 


nodename:network_address:trunks:device 
(mhtsa:2200:00110011:/dev/nsc0) 


6. Create the file /usr/nsc/nets which specifies the sub-networks known to the local node: 


network_name:device 
(tsdev:/dev/nsc0) 


7. Create the file /usr/nse/rvchan which specifies all the nodes known to the local node: 


nodename:network_name:device 
(mhtsa:tsdev:/dev/nsc0) 


E. UNIX System Devices 
UNIX system devices are used to specify the location of certain system resources such as the root filesystem 
and secondary storage space. Entries typically refer to a block type device and include a minor device number 


to identify a subdevice. An entry can optionally include a starting block number and size when specifying con- 
trolled regions such as the swap device. 


Page 79 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


ROOT—Root Device Location 


The entry for root specifies the device where the root file system is to be found. As distributed, it is defined 
as drive 0, section 0 and should not be altered. 


If the system is booted using the BACKUP-ROOT setting of the EAI, the root device will be changed to sec- 
tion 7 of drive 0. If SEC-DISK is set on the EAI, the root device will be changed to be drive 1, section 0. BACKUP- 
ROOT can also be used with the secondary disk. 


PIPE—Pipe Device Location 


The entry for pipe specifies where pipes are to be allocated (must be a mounted file system—the root file 
system should be used). 


SWAP—Swap Device Location and Region 


The entry for swap specifies the device and blocks that will be used for swapping. The fourth field is the 
first block number used and the fifth field indicates how many blocks starting at that point to use. Typically, 
five to six thousand blocks of swap space are needed per megabyte of memory. Care must be taken that the swap 
area specified does not overlap any file system. For example, section 0 is 60,800 blocks long, the root filesystem 
occupies the first 23,000 blocks, and swap is defined as 10,000 blocks starting at block 25,000 by specifying: 


swap dfc 0 25000 10000 


There is also a special file, /dev/swap, that is used by the program ps(1). This file must reflect what block 
device is used for swapping and must be readable. For example: 


rm /dev/swap 

mknod /dev/swap b 0 0 

chmod 440 /dev/swap 

chown sys /dev/swap; chgrp sys /dev/swap 


The special file /dev/swap2 is also used by the ps command when the system has been booted from the second- 
ary disk. It should be defined as above but for disk 1 (minor = 16). Again, these files already exist for the supplied 
system. 


DUMP—Dump Device Location and Region 

The entry for dump specifies the disk section and blocks to be used to dump memory after a system crash. 
As distributed, this will be in the last 32,768 blocks of section 0 and will overlay the swap area since the latter 
is no longer necessary after a crash. The special file /dev/dump0 can be used to access the dumped memory. 


F. System Parameters 


System parameters are used to alter the size of various tables and control structures according to expected 
system load. Unless specified, there is no maximum value; follow recommended values. The values and sizes of 
the basic parameters are also given. The supplied system is configured for a medium loaded system. 


BUFFERS—File System Buffer Cache 
The entry for buffers specifies how many “system buffers” to allocate. Real-time response improves as more 
buffers are allocated. The UNIX system buffers form a “data cache”. Improvement in the hit rate of this cache 


tends to fall as the number of buffers is increased. The entries are normally in the range of 32 to 256. Each buffer 
uses 1084 bytes. 


Page 80 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


HASH— Buffer Hash Table 


The entry for hash specifies how many hash buckets to allocate. These are used to search for a buffer given 
a device number and block number rather than a linear search through the entire buffer pool. This value must 
be a power of two. Recommended values are 32, 64, or 128 depending on the number of buffers. The size is 12 
bytes. 


PHYSIO—Physical I/O Buffer Headers 


The entry for physio specifies how many physical I/O buffer headers to allocate. One is needed for each ac- 
tive physical read or write. The value is normally in the range of 4 to 10 with the size as 60 bytes. 


INODES—File Control Structure 


The entry for inodes specifies how many “inode table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents a unique 
open inode. When the table overflows, the warning message “inode table overflow” will be printed. The table 
size should be increased if this happens regularly. The number of entries used depends on the number of active 
processes, texts, and mounts. The entries are normally in the range of 100 to 300 with the size as 132 bytes. 


FILES —File Control Structure 


The entry for files specifies how many “open-file table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents an open 
file. When the table overflows, the warning message “file table overflow” will be printed. The table size should 
be increased if this happens regularly. The entries are normally in the range of 100 to 300 with the size as 16 
bytes. 


MOUNTS— Mounted File System Table 


The entry for mounts specifies how many “mount table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents a 
mounted file system. The root (/) will always be the first entry. When full, the mount(2) system call will return 
the error EBUSY. The size is 20 bytes. 


SWAPMAP—Swap Space Management Table 


The entry for swapmap specifies how many entries to allocate to the control list used to manage free swap 
system space. When the list overflows due to excessive fragmentation, the system will print a warning message. 
This condition results in the loss of available swap space. The system should be remade with a larger table size 
and rebooted. The number of entries used depends on the number of processes active, their sizes, and the amount 
of memory and swap space available. The entries are normally in the range 50 to 100 with the size as 8 bytes. 


CALLS—System Time-out Facility 


The entry for calls specifies how many “call-out table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents a function 
to be invoked at a later time by the clock handler. When the table overflows, the system will crash and the panic 
message “time-out table overflow” will be printed. This value must be greater than two and is normally in the 
range 10 to 20 with the size as 16 bytes. 


PROCS— Process Table 


The entry for procs specifies how many “process table” entries to allocate. Fach entry represents an active 
process. The swapper is always the first entry, and init(8) is always the second entry. The number of entries 
depends on the number of terminal lines available and the number of processes spawned by each user. The aver- 
age number of processes per user is in the range of 2 to 5. When full, the fork(2) system call will return the 
error EAGAIN. The entry is normally in the range 50 to 200 with the size as 144 bytes. 


Page 81 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


PTBLS—Memory Management Page Tables 


The entry for ptbls specifies how many page tables to allocate. A page table is required for each virtual seg- 
ment of a user process as well as by several functions in the system. The average number of page tables needed 
is two to three times the number of processes in the system. When the system page tables are running out, the 
system will print the warning message “running low on page tables”. The size is 256 bytes. 


TEXTS—Shared Text Table 


The entry for textsspecifies how many “text table” entries to allocate. Each entry represents an active read- 
only shared text segment. When the table overflows, the warning message “text table overflow” is printed. The 
entry is normally in the range of 25 to 50 with the size as 44 bytes. 


CLISTS— Character Buffers 


The entry for clists specifies how many “character list buffers” to allocate. Each buffer contains up to 64 
bytes. The buffers are dynamically linked together to form input and output queues for the terminal lines and 
various other slow-speed devices. The average number of buffers needed per terminal line is in the range of 5 
to 10. When full, input and output characters concerned with terminals will be lost; echoing will continue. The 
size is 72 bytes. 


MAXPROC— Maximum Process Count 


The entry for maxproc specifies how many concurrent processes a nonsuperuser is allowed to run. When 
this limit is reached by a given user ID, the fork system call will return the error EAGAIN. The entry is nor- 
mally in the range 15 to 25. 


3270 Emulation Parameters 


The following parameters are ignored unless 3270 emulation is included in your system description file. All 
of them have default values such that a minimal 3270 emulation system can be included without changes. 


EMRCVSZ—Emulation Receive Buffer Size 


The entry for emrevszspecifies the size of buffers used to receive data. A buffer of this size is used to receive 
each data block transmitted from the remote system. This value must be the maximum size of any single data 
block that may be received. The default value for emrevsz is 512 (bytes). 


EMRBSZ—Emulation Receive Buffer Space 


The entry for emrbsz specifies the size of the receive buffer pool for 3270 emulation in bytes. Emrbsz should 
be a multiple of EMRCVSZ because input buffers are always allocated in EMRCVSZ byte chunks. For each emu- 
lation communications line (i.e., each controller), four receive buffers are allocated to incoming messages. The 
buffer will be freed when all of the data in the message has been processed by a user. The default size of 8192 
bytes provides 16 receive buffers when EMRCVSZ is 512. If no receive buffers are available, no incoming mes- 
sages are received. The size depends on the number of active emulated devices and how long active devices take 
to read the data. The maximum size is 128 kilobytes(KB). 


EMTBSZ—Emulation Transmit Buffer Space 


The entry for emtbsz specifies the size of the transmit buffer pool for 3270 emulation in bytes. Transmit 
buffers are allocated as needed for each write from emulated devices. If enough buffer space is not available 
when it is requested, the writing process will be suspended until space is available. This size depends on the num- 
ber of active emulated devices and the size of transmit messages. The default is 8192. The maximum size is 128 
KB. 


Page 82 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


EMBHDR—Emulation Buffer Control Structures 


The entry for embhdrspecifies how many buffer headers to allocate for 3270 emulation transmit and receive 
buffers. A buffer header is needed for each receive buffer from the time it becomes available until all of the 
data in the receive buffer has been read. A header is needed for each transmit buffer from the time the buffer 
is filled and sent to the transmitter until the buffer is acknowledged or discarded. If you override the default 
value of six buffer headers per emulated device, you must specify the total number of buffer headers to allocate 
for all emulated devices. If too few buffer headers are allocated, requests for transmit and receive buffers will 
roadblock waiting for free headers. The size is 16 bytes for each buffer. 


Synchronous Terminal Parameters 


The following parameters are ignored unless synchronous terminals are included in your system description 
file. All of them have default values such that a minimal synchronous terminal subsystem can be included with- 


me out changes. 


STNPRNT—Synchronous Printer Count 


The entry for stnprnt specifies how many of the synchronous terminal and printer devices specified in the 
system description file are printers. The default value for stnprnt is one fourth of the synchronous terminal 
and printer devices. If stnprntis larger than the number of synchronous devices in your system, a warning mes- 
sage will be printed and stnprnt will be reduced to the default value. 


STIBSZ—Synchronous Terminal Input Buffer Size 


The entry for stibsz specifies the size of the input buffer pool for synchronous terminals and printers in 
bytes. Stibsz should be a multiple of 256 because input buffers are always allocated in 256 byte chunks. For each 
synchronous terminal communications line, four input buffers are allocated to receive incoming messages. The 

tg buffer will be freed when all of the data in the message has been processed by a user. The default buffer size 
of 8192 bytes provides 32 input buffers. If no input buffers are available for an incoming message, the message 
will wait at the sending device until a buffer is freed and can be allocated for the sending device. The maximum 
size is 128 KB. 


STOBSZ—Synchronous Terminal Output Buffer Size 


The entry for stobsz specifies the size of the output buffer pool for synchronous terminals and printers in 
bytes. Output buffers are allocated as needed to send data to synchronous devices. For devices working in line 
mode, almost all buffers will be allocated with a size of 256 bytes. In application mode, buffers are allocated 
for each write system call at the exact requested size. The default buffer size is 8192. The buffer size needed 
on your system will be governed by the type and frequency of usage of synchronous devices. If enough buffer 
space is not available when it is requested, the writing process will be suspended until space is available. The 

eS maximum size is 128 KB. 


STIHBUF—Synchronous Terminal Input Buffer Control Structure 


The entry for stihbuf specifies how many buffer headers to allocate for synchronous terminal input buffers. 
A buffer header is needed for each input buffer from the time it becomes available for input until it is freed 
when all of the data in the buffer has been processed. If you override the default value of four buffer headers 
per synchronous device, the total number of buffer headers to allocate for all synchronous devices must be speci- 
fied. If too few buffer headers are allocated, requests for input buffers will roadblock waiting for free headers. 
Each buffer uses 20 bytes. 


Page 83 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


STOHBUF—Synchronous Terminal Output Buffer Control Structure 


The entry for stohbuf specifies how many headers to allocate for synchronous terminal output buffers. A 
buffer header is needed for each output buffer from the time the buffer is filled and sent to the transmitter 
until receipt of the buffer is positively acknowledged or the buffer is discarded as unsendable. If you override 
the default value of four buffer headers per synchronous device, you must specify the total number of buffer 
headers to allocate for all synchronous devices. If too few buffers are allocated, requests for output buffers will 
roadblock waiting for free headers. Each buffer uses 20 bytes. 


Interprocess Communication Parameters 


The following parameters are used to tune the IPC facilities. All parameters have default values which 
should be sufficient for most installations. 


SHMMAX—Maximum Shared Memory Segment Size S 


The entry for shmmax specifies the maximum size of an attached shared memory segment. The default and 
maximum value is 131,072. 


SHMMIN—Minimum Shared Memory Segment Size 


The entry for shmmin specifies the minimum size of an attached shared memory segment. The default value 
is 1. 


SHMMNI—Maximum Number of Shared Memory Segments 


The entry for shmmni specifies the maximum number of shared memory segments that can be active in 
the system. The default value is 100 with the size as 44 bytes per. 


SHMSEG—Maximum Number of Shared Memory Segments Per Process 

The entry for shmseg specifies the maximum number of shared memory segments that can be attached per 
process. The default value is 6. As distributed, the system limits the total number of process segments to eight, 
at least two of which are always allocated. 


MSGMAX—Maximum Message Size 


The entry for msgmax specifies the maximum size of a message. The default value is 8192. The maximum 
size is 128 KB. 


MSGMNB—Maximum Message Queue Length & 


The entry for msgmnb specifies the maximum length of a message queue. The default value is 16,384. 
MSGTQL—Maximum Number of Messages 


The entry for msgtq/ specifies the number of message headers in the system and thus the number of out- 
standing messages. The default value is 200 and the size is 12 bytes. 


MSGSSZ—Message Segment Size & 


The entry for msgssz specifies the size of a message segment. Messages consist of a contiguous set of mes- 
sage segments large enough to fit the text. The default value is &. 


Note: The product of msgssz and msgseg should be no larger than 131,072 (128 KB). a 


Page 84 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


MSGSEG—Number of Message Segments 

The entry for msgseg specifies the number of message segments in the system. The default value is 8192. 
MSGMAP—Message Segment Map Size 

The entry for msgmap specifies the size of the control map used to manage message segments. If this map 
overflows, a warning message is printed on the console; and this value should be increased. The default value 
is 100 and the size is 8 bytes. 
SEMMNI—Number of Semaphore Identifiers 


The entry for semmnisepcifies the number of semaphore indentifiers in the system, i.e., the number of sem- 
aphore sets. The default value is 50 and the size is 32 bytes. 


SEMMNS—Number of Semaphores in the System 


The entry for semmns specifies the number of semaphores in the system. The default value is 300 and the 
size is 8 bytes. 


SEMMNU—Number of Undo Structures in the System 


The entry for semmnu specifies the number of undo structures in the system. The default value is 30. The 
size is equal to 4 x (semume + 2) bytes. 


SEMUME—Maximum Number of Undo Entries per Structure 


The entry for semume specifies the maximum number of undo entries per undo structure. The default value 
is 10. 


SEMMSL—Maximum Number of Semaphores per Identifier 


The entry for semms! specifies the maximum number of semaphores per semaphore indentifier. The default 
value is 25. 


SEMOPM—Maximum Number of Semaphore Operations per System Call 


The entry for semopm specifies the maximum number of semaphore operations that can be executed per 
semojX2) system call. The default value is 10. 


SEMMAP—Semaphore Map Size 

The entry for semmap specifies the size of the control map used to manage semaphore sets. If this map over- 
flows, a warning message is printed on the console, and this value should be increased. The default value is 50 
with the size as 8 bytes. 


G. Software Drivers 


The software drivers in the system are also configurable to permit control over available functions in the 
system. Some entries require a count field when the facility contains a definable number of similar devices. 


DGN— Diagnostic System Interface 
The entry for dgn specifies that the general diagnostic interface is to be included in the system. This is a 


required device in that it is necessary for the restoral and removal of the periphery as well as to perform the 
on-line diagnostics. Note also that the on-line diagnostics require semaphores, messages, and shared memory. 


Page 85 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


Each type of diagnosable device requires an entry in the /dev/dgn directory with a minor device number 
that corresponds to the device as follows: 


DEVICE MINOR 

dfe 0 

mhd 1 

iop 2 i 
tng 3 
un52 4 

tn74 5 

acu 6 

tn75 7 

und3 8 

memory 9 

tn85 10 

tn82 ll 

tn4 12 

unbd6 13 


MEMORY —Memory System Interface 


The entry for memory specifies that the interface for physical memory (/dev/mem), system virtual memory 
(/dev/kmem), and KOF/NULL (/dev/null) be included in the system. The minor device numbers for the above 
are 0, 1, and 2, respectively. 


The count field specifies the number of kilobytes per memory array board and must be 128 for stores 
equipped with TN7 boards, 512 for TN14 boards, and 1024 for TN28 boards. This count is not the total memory 
on the system. The operating system will calculate the amount of memory present even if boards are missing. 


Note: It is imperative the count field be set correctly. 
SYSTTY—Controlling Terminal Interface 


The entry for systty specifies that the controlling terminal interface (/dev/tty) is to be included in the sys- 
tem. This interface allows user programs to communicate with the terminal that initiated them without know- 
ing the exact pathname of that terminal (e.g., /dev/tty17). The minor device number should be 0. The modes 
should be 666. 


OSM— Operating System Message Interface 


The entry for osm specifies that the interface for accessing system warning messages is to be included in oS 
the system. There is no count field. Three minor devices are defined: 


0—returns all previous and new messages (/dev/osm.all) 
l—returns all previous messages (/dev/osm.cur) 
2—returns new messages (/dev/osm) 


Any number of users can be reading from /dev/osm* The modes are typically 444. 


ERROR—Error Logging Interface & 


The entry for error specifies that the error logging interface is to be included in the system. This facility 
permits hardware errors to be recorded in a file for later analysis. 


The minor device number should be 0. The modes should be 400, owned by root. cy 


Page 86 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


PROFILE— Operating System Activity Profiler 


The entry for profile specifies that the activity profiler for the operating system is to be included in the sys- 
tem. It allows an administrator to analyze the performance of the system based on the amount of time spent 
in various system routines. An extensive knowledge of the system is required to correctly analyze this data. See 
profiler(1M). 


The minor device number should be 0. The modes should be 600, owned by root. 
SEMA— Semaphore Facility 


The entry for sema specifies whether to include semaphore code. It is required on systems configured for 
on-line diagnostics. 


MESG—Interprocess Message Facility 


The entry for mesg specifies whether to include message code. It is required on systems configured for on- 
line diagnostics. 


SHMEM—Shared Memory Facility 


The entry for shmem specifies whether to include shared memory code. It is required on systems configured 
for on-line diagnostics. 


TRACE— General Driver Tracing Mechanism 


The entry for trace specifies that the general driver tracing mechanism is to be included in the system. It 
is most often used by the VPM driver to record data line activity. 


The minor device number corresponds to the device used in the operating system driver that is being traced. 
The count field must correspond to the maximum trace device being used. The modes should be readable by the 
tracing utility. 


VPM— Virtual Protocol Machine 


The TN82/UN53 peripheral controller (hereafter referred to as the UN53) provides up to four synchronous 
communications interfaces. The UN53 executes the link-level communications protocol and performs DMA data 
transfers between main memory and the communications device. A link-level protocol description written in 
C language is compiled on the host computer [see vpme(1C)] and then down-loaded into the UN53 by the 
vpmstart command. 


The VPM driver is split into two parts—a protocol driver (top half) which provides a transparent user inter- 
face and the UN53 driver (bottom half) which also contains a set of utility routines for communicating with 
the VPM operating system in the UN53. 


The VPM is installed as follows: 


1. The count field in the configuration file must be set to the number of VPM protocol-driver devices desired. 
One UN53'subdevice (see UN53 above) is required for each VPM protocol-driver device. If other drivers 
that use the UN53 driver are configured, additional UN53 subdevices must be configured to support these 
drivers. If the VPM trace capability [see vpm(7)| is to be used, the configuration file must also define 
the trace driver (see TRACE above). 


Vpmbsz, a configurable parameter which gives the size of the buffer pool available to vpm, may be ad- 
justed to be different from the default value found in /etc/master. Refer to master(4) for more informa- 
tion. © 


Page 87 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


2 


Compile the protocol script using vpme(1C): ae 


vpmc —o script.o script.c 


where script.c is the source file for the protocol description. Only half-duplex byte-oriented protocols are 
currently supported by the VPM on the UN53 PC. 


. Install the compiled protocol description in a convenient directory and modify the /ete/rc file to load the 


compiled protocol description into the selected UN53 each time the system is rebooted (first transition 
to multiuser). 


. Modify the /etc/re file so that it executes a vpmset(1C) command for each VPM protocol-driver device. 


The arguments to the vpmset command specify the protocol-driver device and the UN53 device: 
/etc/vpmset /dev/vpm? /dev/un53.? & 


The vpmset commands should be executed on the first transition to multiuser. An attempt to open a 
VPM protocol-driver minor device for reading and/or writing will fail if the corresponding vpmset com- 
mand has not yet been executed. 


EMC and EM—3270 Emulation Interface 


The 3270 emulation controller (emc) and device (em) drivers provide users with a means for simulating 3270- 
type devices in communications with a remote host. These drivers make use of the TN82/UN53 hardware and 
VPM software to emulate a 3270-type controller. Each controller requires a single communications lines and 
supports up to 32 simulated devices. 


The EMC driver is a pseudo-device driver that performs administrative and controller oriented functions 
[see emulio(4)|. The EMC interfaces are installed as follows: 


ti 


The EM driver is a pseudo-device driver that performs 3270-type device assignments and handles the user & 


An entry must be placed in the system description file 
emc N 


where “N” is the number of 3270 emulation controllers needed. 


. A special file must be created in the /dev directory for each controller. The files should be named 


/dev/emcX, where “X” is the minor device number, from 0 through N-1, where “N” is the number of con- 
trollers. 


. Modify the /etc/emulload file so that it starts the appropriate controllers.on the appropriate devices for GB 


your system. As distributed, /etc/emulload starts controller 0 on UN58 line 0. 


. Modify the /ete/rc file so that it executes the emulload command. Note that this must be done in /ete/re 


at some point after the /usr file system is mounted. 


. Modify the /etc/shutdown file to disable all 3270 emulation controllers. For example, the command 


/etc/emulentr! /dev/eme0 off & 


will disable controller 0. 


Page 88 


6/82 


ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE 


interface to the devices. The EM interfaces are installed as follows: 


fs 


An entry must be placed in the system description file 
em N 


where “N” is the maximum number of emulated devices that can be connected to your system at one time. 
This number must provide for proper minor device numbers if multiple controllers are specified [see 
emulio(4)]. 


. A special file must be created in the /dev directory for each emulated device. The files should be named 


/dev/emtX, where “X” is the same as the minor device number. The minor device numbers for emulated 
devices range from 0 through N-1, where N is the number of emulated devices as specified above. For each 
terminal minor device number, the low-order 5 bits specify the device number, and the high-order 3 bits 
specify the controller minor device number. 


ae STC and ST—Synchronous Terminal Interface 


The synchronous terminal controller and synchronous terminal drivers provide access to ASCII binary syn- 
chronous protocol compatible terminals (Model 4540 of the Teletype Corporation) and printers over one or more 
synchronous communications lines using UN53 and TN82 hardware described under the heading VPM-— Virtual 
Protocol Machine. Each communications line can support one cluster controller connected to any combination 
of up to 32 devices, (i.e., terminals and printers). 


The STC driver is a pseudo-device driver that performs hardware assignment, communications line enable 
and disable operations, and printer device assignments for each synchronous terminal communications line. The 
STC interfaces are installed as follows: 


ie 


An entry must be placed in the system description file 
ste N 


where “N” is the number of synchronous terminal communications lines. 


. A special file must be created in the /dev directory for each line. The files should be named /dev/stX, 


where “X” is the same number as the minor device number which is also the synchronous terminal com- 
munications line number. Line numbers range from 0 through N-1, where “N” is the number of synchro- 
nous terminal communications lines. 


. Modify the /ete/stload file so that it starts the appropriate lines on the appropriate devices for your sys- 


tem. As distributed, /etce/stload starts one line on UN58 port 0. 


. Modify the /etc/rc file so that it executes the stload command. Note that this must be done in /ete/re 


at some point after the /usr file system is mounted. 


. Modify the /etc/shutdown file to disable all synchronous terminal communications lines. For example, 


the commands 


/ete/stentrl /dev/st0 off 
/ete/vpmset —d /dev/st0 


will disable line 0. 


The ST driver is a pseudo-device driver that performs terminal device assignments and handles the user 


interface to synchronous terminal and printer devices. The ST interfaces are installed as follows: 


1. An entry must be placed in the system description file 


st N 


Page 89 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


H. 


where “N” is the maximum number of synchronous devices that can be connected to the system at one 
time. (That is, maximum number of terminals and printers connected to all active synchronous terminal 
communications lines.) 


. A special file must be created in the /dev directory for each printer device. The files should be named 


/dev/spX, where “X” is the same as the minor device number. The minor device numbers for printer de- 
vices range from 0 through STNPRNT-1. STNPRNT is a system parameter specifying the number of 
printer devices. If STNPRNT is not specified in the system description file, it will default to N / 4, where 
“N” is the number of synchronous devices as specified above. 


. A special file must be created in the /dev directory for each terminal device. The files are usually named 


/dev/ttyZZ, where “ZZ” is a name that does not conflict with the asynchronous tty line names. The minor 
device numbers for these devices range from STNPRNT through N-1, where “N” is the number of syn- 
chronous devices as specified above. 


UNIX System Generation 


Before generating your first UNIX system, the file called Makefile in the /usr/sre/uts/3b/cf directory 
should be modified. This file contains five symbols that are used for system identification; it is used to initialize 
the internal system name structure [see uname(1) and uname(2)]. The five symbols (which are eight charac- 
ters maximum) are as follows: 


SYS system name (e.g., mh3bs); 

NODE the name by which the system is known on the uuep(1C) network (e.g., mh3bs); 

REL the operating system release (e.g., 4.1); 

VER the current version of the system; this is usually four characters indicating when the sys- 
tem was made (e.g., 0620 for June 20); 

MACH the machine hardware name (e.g., 3B20). 


Generally, only the first two symbols need local modification; the REL symbol is a constant for the duration 
of this release, while the VER symbol should be redefined each time you make(1) the system. The name of the 
executable file produced by the generation procedure will be the concatenation of the SYS and VER symbols 
(e.g., pydba0620). 


To generate a new UNIX operating system, follow the procedure below: 


ed /usr/sre/uts/3b/cf 
ed /ete/system 


a 
[information as described above] 

Ww 

q 

config 


make VER=ver 


Page 90 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


After a new system has been built, first test it by the following procedure: 


cep /usr/src/uts/3b/sysver / # sysver as above 
ed / 

umount /dev/dsk1 # /usr file system 

rm /unix 

In /sysver /unix 

syne 


Halt the processor and reboot the system. Note that this procedure results in two names for the operating 
system object—the generic /unixand the actual name (e.g., /py3ba0620). An old system may be booted by refer- 
ring to the actual name, but remember that many programs [such as ps(1)] use the generic name /unixto obtain 
the name-list of the system. 


Systems that are no longer useful should be removed from the /and /usr/sre/uts/3b directories. 
I. File Systems 


Each physical pack is partitioned into 16 logical sections. This partitioning is defined in the operating sys- 
tem. 


A file system starts at block 0 of a section of the disk and may be as large as the size of that section; if it 
is smaller than the size of a section, the remainder of that section is unused. Note that the sections themselves 
may overlap physical areas of the pack, but the file systems must never overlap. 


The program mkfs(1M) is used to initialize a section of the disk to be a file system. Next, the program 
labelit is used to label the file system with its name and the name of the pack. Finally, the file system should 
be checked for consistency by using fsek(1M). The file system may then be mounted using mount(1M). 


ADMINISTRATIVE FILES 
A. /etc/motd 


This file contains the “message-of-the-day” . It is printed by /etc/profile after every successful /ogin; there- 
fore, the “message-of-the-day” should be kept short and to the point. The news(1) facility should be used for 
more explicit messages. 


B. /etc/re 


On the transition between init states, /etc/init invokes /bin/sh to run /etc/rc (must have executable modes). 
So that /ete/re can properly handle the removal of temporary files and the mounting and unmounting of file 
systems, it is invoked with three arguments—new state, number of times this state has been entered, and previ- 
ous state. When the system: is initially booted, /etc/rc is invoked with arguments “1 0 0”; when state two 
(multiuser) is subsequently entered, the arguments are “201”. 


When state 2 is entered more than once (via another /etc/init 2), no action will be taken by this file. This 
enables the system administrator to add or delete Jogin processes while the system is in multiuser mode (see 
/etc/inittab). 


When the init process is sent a hangup or a power-fail signal, it will invoke /etc/rc with an “x” appended 
to the first argument (e.g., “2x 1 2”). 


Daemons may be invoked by /etc/re, by including lines for them in /etc/inittab, or by /usr/lib/crontab. 


These files must be edited to suit local conditions; see init(8). 


Page 91 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


C.  /ete/inittab & 


This file indicates to /etc/init which processes to create or terminate in each init state. By convention, state 
6 is singleuser and state 2 is multiuser. For example, the following line creates a sample single-user environ- 
ment: 


s6:6:wait:(uname;echo 1 user w/o gettys running;) > /dev/console 2>&1 & 
co: :respawn:/etc/getty console console 


This indicates that for state 6 a process that produces the system name followed by the “single user” message 
is created. Following this process a shell will be executed. 


To attach a Jogin process to the console in the multiuser state, add the line: 
2:co:e:/ete/getty console — & 
and for line /dev/tty00 for use by 1200/300/150/110 baud synchronous terminals, add the following lines: 


1:00:k:/ete/getty tty00 ! 
2:00:¢:/ete/getty tty00 3 3600 


The arguments to getty are the device, speed table, and number of seconds to allow before hanging up the line. 
The line for state 1 indicates that any processes running with identifier 00 should be killed (k flag) and a getty 
executed to clean up the file that records Jogin processes for that line. 


For line /dev/tty99 for use by a synchronous terminal, add the following lines: 


1:99:k:/ete/stgetty tty99 ! 
2:99:c:/etc/stgetty tty99—300 


The arguments to stgetty are the device, action code, and number of seconds to allow before abandoning a login 
attempt. 


Again, this file must be edited for local conditions. The supplied version include entries for the console and 
the first 50 terminal lines. The terminal lines are “commented out” to init by the use of the o flag. Simply remove 
this flag for those terminal lines that are actually configured in the system. See getty(8), init(8), inittab(4), 
and stgetty(8). 


D. /etc/passwd 


This file is used to describe each user to the system. A new line must be added for each new user. Each line & 
has seven fields separated by colons: 


1. Login name: normally one to six characters, first character alphabetic, the remainder alphanumeric, and 
no uppercase characters. 


2. Encrypted password: initially null, filled in by passwd(1). The encrypted password contains 13 bytes 
while the actual password is limited to a maximum of eight bytes. The enerypted password may be fol- 
lowed by a comma and up to four more bytes of password “age” information. % 


3. User ID: a number between 0 and 60,000; 0 indicates the superuser. User IDs 0 through 99 are reserved. 


4. Group ID: a number between 0 and 60,000; the default is group 1 (one). Group IDs 0 through 99 are re- 
served. & 


Page 92 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


ao 


. Accounting information: this field is used by various accounting programs. It usually contains the user 
name, department number, and account number. 


6. Login directory: full pathname (keep pathnames reasonably short). 


7. Program name: if null, /bin/sh is invoked after a successful login. If present, the named program is in- 
voked in place of /bin/sh. 


For example: 


ehh::138:1:6824-G.H.Hurtz(4357):/usr/ghh: 
spl::244:1:6510-S.P.LeName(4466):/usr/spl:/bin/rsh 


See also passwd(4), login(1), passwd(1), and pwek(1M) for more information. 
E. /etc/group 


This file is used to describe each group to the system. A new line must be added for each new group. Each 
line has four fields separated by colons: 


1. Group name: normally one to six characters, first character alphabetic, rest alphanumeric, and no upper- 
case characters. 


2. Encrypted password: contains 13 bytes while the actual password is limited to a maximum of eight bytes. 
3. Group ID: a number between 0 and 65,535. Group IDs 0 through 99 are reserved. 


4. Login names: list of all Jogin names in the group, separated by commas; list of all Jogin names that may 
use newgrp(1) to become a member of the group. 


Group passwords are strongly discouraged. See also group(4) and grpck on pwek(1M). 
F. /etc/profile 


When the shell is executed and is the leader of a process group, as is the case when it is invoked by login, 
the shell will read and execute the commands in /etce/profile before executing commands in the user’s .profile 
file. This allows the system administrator to set up a standard environment for all users (e.g., executing umask, 
setting shell variables, etc.) and take care of other housekeeping details (such as news ~n). Note that in /etc/ 
profile the shell variable $0 indicates the invocation—normal shell (—sh), restricted shell (—rsh), or su com- 
mand (—su). See login(1). 


G. /ete/checklist 


This file contains a list of default devices to be checked for consistency by the fsck(1M) program. The de- 
vices normally correspond to those mounted when the system is in multiuser mode. For example, a sample 
checklist would be: 


/dev/rdsk0 
/dev/rdsk1 


Note that the disk sections are specified as character devices. Character devices can be checked faster than 
block devices. Remember that if the root file system is modified the system must be rebooted immediately with- 
out using syne(1). 


Page 93 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


H. /etc/shutdown 


This file contains procedures to gracefully shut down the system in preparation for file save or scheduled 
downtime. 


|. /etc/filesave and /etc/tapesave 
These files contain prototypes for local file saves. 
J. /usr/adm/pacet 


This file contains the process accounting information; see acct(1M). The owner and group of this file must 
be adm while the mode must be 664. 


K. /usr/adm/wtmp 


This file is the log of login processes. The owner and group of this file must be adm while the mode must 
be 664. 


REGENERATING SYSTEM SOFTWARE 


System source is located under the directory /usr/src. The subdirectories are named emd (commands), lib 
(libraries), uts (the operating system), and head (header files); see mk(8) for details on how to remake system 
software. 


A couple of anomalies: the accounting routine that deals with holidays and the prime/nonprime time split 
must be recompiled at the end of each year (it is correct for BTL-New Jersey for the year that the system is 
released). The file is /usr/src/emd/acct/lib/pnpsplit.ec. A reminder is sent to /usr/adm/acct/nite/log, the stan- 
dard place for such messages, starting a week before year-end and continuing until pnpsplit.cis recompiled; see 
the “UNIX SYSTEM ACCOUNTING” section for details. 


Page 94 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


& ATTACHMENT 5.1 


# 3B20S Processor Configuration 
dfc 0 a 0 0 0 0 3 
mhd 0 0 0 0 0 4 
& mhd 1 1 0 0 0 4 
!dfc 1 11 1 0 0 0 3 
mhd 2 0 0 0 0 4 
lop 0 11 2 0 0 0 2 
tn83 0 0 0 0 0 0 
acu 1 2 0 0 0 0 
ee un52 0 3 0 0 0 0 
tn74 2 4 0 0 0 0 
tn74 3 5 0 0 0 0 
tn74 4 6 0 0 0 0 
tn74 5 7 0 0 0 0 
iop 1 11 3 0 0 0 2 
tn74 0 1 0 0 0 0 
und52 af 3 0 0 0 0 
tn74 i 4 0 0 0 0 
tn85 0 2 0 0 0 0 
und3 0 6 0 0 0 0 


S 


# Parameters 
buffers 250 
inodes 300 
files 300 
mounts 12 
swapmap 100 
calls 60 
procs 150 
texts 100 
clists 500 

ee maxproc 24 
ptbls 300 
hash 64 
physio 5 
# Software Drivers 
systty 

& osm 8 
profile 

memory 512 

dgn 
error 


Page 95 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


ATTACHMENT 5.1 (Contd) 


trace 4 

vpm 4 

shmem 

mesg 

sema 

t System Devices 

root dfc 0 

pipe dfe 0 

dump dfc 10 0) 3192 
swap dfe 0 25000 10000 


Page 96 


