6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


10. UNIX SYSTEM REMOTE JOB ENTRY 
GENERAL 
A. Purpose 

This section contains information on the design and operation of the UNIX System Remote Job Entry (RJE). 
In this document, RJE refers to the facilities provided by UNIX operating system and not to the Remote Job 
Entry feature of the HASP and JES2 subsystems produced by International Business Machines (IBM). 

The information contained in this section should be used to augment the information contained in the UNIX 
System Administrator’s Manual [rje(8)] and the “Remote Job Entry” section of the UNIX System User’s Guide. 
There will be assumptions made concerning allocation of responsibilities between UNIX system and IBM opera- 
tions, hardware configuration, etc. Although these assumptions may not fully apply to your location, they 
should not interfere with the intent of this document. 

The major topics discussed in this document are as follows: 


e SETTING UP—Hardware requirements and RJE generation on the IBM and UNIX systems. 


e DIRECTORY STRUCTURES—tThe controlling RJE directory structure and a typical RJE subsystem 
directory structure. 


e RJE PROGRAMS—Programs that make up an RJE subsystem. 
e UTILITY PROGRAMS—Programs available for debugging or tracing. 


e RJE ACCOUNTING —The accounting of jobs done by RJE and some methods for using this accounting 
data. 


e TROUBLESHOOTING—Error recovery and procedures for identifying and fixing RJE problems. 
B. Facilities 
Discussions will focus on a hypothetical RJE connection between a UNIX system, whose nodename is pwha, 
and an IBM 370/168, referred to as B. We also assume that pwha is connected to an IBM 370/158, referred to 
as C. The UNIX operating system machine emulates an IBM System/360 remote multileaving work station. 
SETTING UP 
A. Hardware 
In the remainder of this guide, the hardware described below will be referred to as the physical device; and 
its name will be referred to as device?; where ? is the device number. To use RJE on a UNIX system, the follow- 
ing hardware is needed: 
DEC Hardware 
e KMC11-B Microprocessor—Used to drive the RJE line. 
e DMC11-DA or DMC11-FA line unit—The DMC11-DA interfaces with Bell 208 and 209 synchronous 
modems or equivalent. Speeds of up to 19,200 bits per second can be used. The DMC11-FA interfaces 


with Bell 500 A LI/5 synchronous modems or equivalent. Speeds of up to 250,000 bits per second can 
be used. 


Page 155 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


Each KMC/DMC pair supports a single RJE connection. On the DMC11 line unit, the Cyclic Redundancy 
Check (CRC) switch should be set to inhibit automatic transmission of CRC bytes. The line unit should hold 
the line at logical zero when inactive. 


3B205S Processor Hardware 
e TN82—The user interface board equipped with firmware for synchronous communications. & 


e UN53—Synchronous communications board. This board contains hardware to handle up to four syn- 
chronous lines. One line can be high-speed with V.35 or EIA interface. 


One TN82/UN53 pair and the RJE software currently support up to four low-speed (9.6 KB or lower) RJE 
lines or one high-speed (56 KB) RJE line. 


B. IBM Generation & 


The following applies to the host IBM system. The remote line to the UNIX operating system machine 
should be described as a System/360 remote work station. The following parameters must be initialized and 
must agree with their counterparts on the UNIX operating system machine: 


e Number of printers (NUMPR)—The number of logical printers (up to 7) 
e Number of punches (NUMPU)—The number of logical punches (up to 7) 
e Number of readers (NUMRD)—The number of logical readers (up to 7). 
The JES2 parameters for the hypothetical connection to IBM system Bare as follows: 


RMT5 8/360,LINE=5,CONSOLE,MULTI,TRANSP,NUMPR-=5, 
NUMPU=1,NUMRD=5,ROUTECDE=5 

Rd5.PR1 PRWIDTH=132 

R5.PR2 PRWIDTH=132 

R5.PR3 PRWIDTH=132 

R5.PR4 PRWIDTH=182 

R5.PR5 PRWIDTH=132 

R5.PU1 NOSUSPND 

R5.RD1 PRIOINC=0,PRIOLIM=14 

R5.RD2 PRIOINC=0,PRIOLIM=14 

R5.RD3 PRIOINC=0,PRIOLIM=14 

R5.RD4 PRIOINC=0,PRIOLIM=14 

R5.RD5 PRIOINC=0,PRIOLIM=14 


System pwha is referenced by line 5 (LINE=5), remote 5 (RMTS). It is defined as having a console, for ine 
rjestat(1C) command, five printers, one punch, and five readers. Although you may have up to seven printers 
or punches, the total number of printers and punches may not exceed eight. The line is described as a transpar- 
ent (TRANSP), multileaving (MULTI) line. The remaining information describes attributes of the printers, 
punches, and readers. 


Normally, separator pages are transmitted with IBM print files. UNIX system RJE does not remove separa- 
tor pages. To prevent transmission of separator pages on printer 1 of the previous example, its attributes would & 


be: 
R5.PR1 PRWIDTH=132,NOSEP 


NOSEP should be included for all printers when separator pages are not desired. Most IBM systems can also 
be told via a console command to cancel transmission of separator pages on printers. This can be done from the ee 


Page 156 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


IBM system console or from the remote UNIX operating system machine via rjestat. For example, the follow- 
ing JES2 command would cancel separator page transmission on printer 1: 


$TR5.PR1,S=N 

C. UNIX System Generation 
If the RJE remote dialing facility is to be used, the administrator must make sure that the definition for 
RJECU in the file /usr/include/rje.his the device to be used for remote dialing. RJECU is defined to be /dev/dn2 
when distributed. To compile and install RJE, the normal make(1) procedures are used (see the appropriate 
" Setting up the UNIX System" section of this guide). Once an RJE subsystem has been installed, the remote 
line must be described in the configuration file /usr/rje/lines. This file as it exists on the hypothetical system 


pwha is as follows: 


B pwha /usr/rjel rjel vpm0 5:5:1 1200:512:y 
C pwha /usr/rje2 rje2 vpml 1:1:1 1200:512 


The /usr/rje/lines is accessed by all components of RJE. Each line of the table (maximum of 8) defines an 
RJE connection. Its seven columns may be labeled host, system, directory, prefix, device, peripherals, and 
parameters. These columns are described as follows: 

e host—The IBM System name, e.g., A, B, C. This string can be up to six characters long. 

e system—The UNIX System nodename [see uname(1)]. 

e directory—The directory name of the servicing RJE subsystem (e.g., /usr/rje2). 

e prefix—The string prepended to most files and programs in the directory (i.e., rje2). 

e device—The name of the controlling Virtual Protocol Machine (VPM) device, with /dev/ excised. In 
order to specify a VPM device, all VPM software must be installed, and the proper special files must 


be made [see vpm(7) and mknod(1M)]. 


e peripherals—Information on the logical devices (readers, printers, punches) used by RJE. There are 
three subfields. Each subfield is separated by “:” and is described as follows: 


1. Number of logical readers. 
2. Number of logical printers. 
3. Number of logical punches. 


Note: The number of peripherals specified for an RJE subsystem must agree with the number of periph- 
erals that have been described on the remote machine for that line. 


e parameters—This field contains information on the type of connection to make. Each subfield is sepa- 
rated by “:”. Any or all fields may be omitted; however, the fields are positional. All but trailing 
delimiters must be present. For example, in: 

1200:512:::9-555-1212 
‘subfields 3 and 4 are missing. Each subfield is defined as follows: 


1. space—This subfield specifies the amount of space (S) in blocks that RJE tries to maintain on 
file systems it touches. The default is 0 blocks. Send(1C) will not submit jobs and rjeinit issues 


Page 157 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


a warning when less than 1.55 blocks are available; rjerecv stops accepting output from the 
host when the capacity falls to S blocks; RJE becomes dormant until conditions improve. If the 
space on the file system specified by the user on the “usr=” card would be depleted to a point 
below S, the file will be put in the job subdirectory of the connection’s home directory rather 
than in the place that the user requested. 


2. size—This subfield specifies the size in blocks of the largest file that can be accepted from the 
host without truncation taking place. The default is no truncation. Note the UNIX system has 
a default 1 megabyte file size limit. 


3. badjobs—This subfield specifies what to do with undeliverable returning jobs. If an output file 
is undeliverable for any reason other than file system space limitations (e.g., missing or invalid 
“usr=” card) and this subfield contains the letter y, the output will be retained in the job 
subdirectory of the home directory; and login rje is notified via mail(1). If this subfield has any 
other value, undeliverable output will be discarded. The default is “n”. Ra 


4. console—This subfield specifies the status of the interactive status terminal for this line. If the 
subfield contains an i, the status console facilities of rjestat will be inhibited. In all cases, the 
normal noninteractive uses of rjestat will continue to function. The default is “y”. 


5. dial-up—This subfield contains a telephone number to be used to call a host machine. The tele- 
phone number may contain the digits 0 through 9, and the character “-”, which denotes a pause. 
If the telephone number is not present, no dialing is attempted; and a leased line is assumed. 


When multiple readers have been specified, jobs that are submitted for transmission to IBM are assigned 
to the reader with the fewest cards on it. Each reader gets an equal amount of service. This prevents smaller 
jobs from having to wait for a previously submitted large job to be transmitted. When multiple printers or & 
punches have been specified, returning jobs get assigned to free printers (or punches) allowing smaller output 
files to bypass large output files. 


Deciding how many peripherals to specify depends on the use of that RJE subsystem. If an RJE subsystem 
is heavily used for off-line printing (i.e., output does not return to the UNIX operating system machine), the 
administrator would want to specify multiple readers but would not have a need for multiple printers or punch- 
es. 


DIRECTORY STRUCTURES 


A. Controlling Directory 


The controlling directory used by RJE is /usr/rje. This directory contains RJE programs for use by separate on 
RJE subsystems (e.g., rjel, rje2, rje3) and the shell queuer’s directory. Most RJE programs existing here have 
been compiled such that each RJE subsystem shares the text of these programs. A snapshot of this directory 
on our hypothetical machine is as follows: 


-rWxY-xI-X 3rje rje 4068 Mar 4 10:42 evt 
-rw-r--r-- lrje rje 42 Apr 10 09:52 lines & 


-PWXT-xI-X 8rje rje 15096 Apr 10 13:01 rjedisp 
-WXx?-XP-x 3rje rje 2328 Mar 4 10:21 rjehalt 
-rWxI-XI-X 3rje rje 10396 Apr 15 10:07 rjeinit 
-I'-X------ 3rje rje 785 Apr 8 09:00 rjeload 


Page 158 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


-rwSI-xI-X 3rje rje 5040 Mar 27 09:28 rjeger 
-rwxr-Xr-xX 3rje rje 4072 Apr 1 15:40 rjerecv 
-rWxI-XI-X 3rje rje 3888 Mar 27 09:35 rjexmit 
-r'WSI-xI-x 1 root rje 2696 Mar 27 14:42 shqer 
-PWXP-XxT-X 3rje rje 5920 Apr 2 15:47 snoop 
drwxr-xr-r 2rje_ rije 80 Mar 25 13:26 sque 


The RJE subsystems are generated in their own directory by linking the program names in this directory 
to the appropriate names in the subsystem directory. The programs are described in the part “RJE PRO- 
GRAMS”. The file lines is the configuration file used by all RJE subsystems. The directory sque is used by the 
shell queuer (shqer). This directory contains: 


-rw-r--r-- lrje rje 0 Feb 14 14:04 errors 
-rw-r--r-- lrje rje 0 Feb 14 14:04 log 


When shger has work to do, the files Jog and errors will be of nonzero length; and temporary files (tmp*) 
will also appear here. 


B. Subsystem Directory 
The RJE subsystem described in this section maintains the connection between pwbha and IBM Band will 


be referred to as rjel. The first line of /usr/rje/lines describes rjel. As noted in this file, rjel runs in the direc- 
tory /usr/rjel. A snapshot of this directory is as follows: 


-rw-r--r-- lrje rje 4990 Apr 15 08:30 acctlog 
-TWXI-XI-X 3rje rje 4068 Mar 4 10:42 cvt 
-Yw-r--r-- lrje rje 0 Apr 15 04:02 errlog 
drwxrwxrwx 2rje_ rije 192 Apr 10 09:51 job 
-Tw-r--r-- lrje rje 194 Apr 15 08:11 joblog 
-rw-r--r-- lrje rje 0 Apr 15 08:11 resp 


-r'WXIr-XI-X 38rje rje 15096 Apr 10 13:01 rjeldisp 
-TWXI-XxI-X 3rje rje 2328 Mar 4 10:21 rjelhalt 
-PWx?-XI-X 3rje rje 10396 Apr 15 10:07 rjelinit 


Page 159 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


-I'-X------ 38rje rje 785 Apr 8 09:00 rjelload 
-r'wsr-xr-X 3rje rje 5040 Mar 27 09:28 rjelger 
-rWxXI-XIr-X 3rje rje 4072 Apr 1 15:40 rjelrecy 
-P'WXI-XI-X 3rje rje 3888 Mar 27 09:35 rjelxmit 
drwxr-xr-x 2rje_ rje 144 Apr 15 08:30 rpool 
-rwxIr-XIr-X 3rje rje 5920 Apr 2 15:47 snoop0 
drwxrwxrwx 2rje_ rje 176 Apr 10 13:03 spool 
drwxr-xr-x 2rje rje 224 Apr 10 18:56 squeue 
-rw-r--r-- lrje_ rje 0 Apr 15 10:30 stop 
-rw-r--r-- lrje rje 274 Mar 7 20:25 testjob 


The programs rje1*, evt, and snoop0 are linked to the corresponding programs in /usr/rje. The remaining 
files and their uses are as follows: 


e acctlog—Accounting data is stored in this file if it exists. This file is the responsibility of the RJE ad- 
ministrator. 


e errlog—Used by rjel to log errors. It can be useful for debugging rjel problems. & 


e joblog—Used by rjelqer and rjestat to notify rjelxmit that a job (or console request) has been sub- 
mitted. It also contains the process-group number of the rjel processes. The program evt can be used 
to convert this file to a readable form. 


e resp—Contains console messages received from IBM B. These messages can be responses for rjestat 
or IBM responses to submitted jobs (i.e., on reader messages). This file is truncated if it grows to a size 
greater than 70,000 bytes. 


e stop—Indicates that rjelhalt has been executed. The existence of this file indicates to rjestat that 
rjel has been halted by the operator. 


e testjob—A sample job that can be submitted to test the rjel subsystem. Originally, the job control state- 
ments may have to be changed to suit your IBM system. 


When rjel terminates abnormally, the file dead should appear in this directory. This file contains a short 
message indicating why rjel is not operating and is used by rjestat to report the problem. The remaining direc- 
tories and their uses are as follows: 


e job—Used to save undeliverable jobs if the proper parameter has been specified in /usr/rje/lines. The 
sample job described above is also delivered to this directory. This directory should be mode 777. 


e rpool—Contains temporary files used to gather output from the remote machine. These files are named 
pr* (for print output files) and pu*(for punch output files). Once a complete file has been received, the 
‘file is dispatched in the proper way by rjeldisp. 


e spool—Used by send to store temporary files to be submitted to the remote machine. This directory 
must ‘be mode 777. 


Page 160 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 
e squeue—Used by rjel to store submitted files until they are transmitted. The program rjelger is used 
by send to move the temporary files in the spool directory to this directory. 
RJE PROGRAMS 
All programs described below, with the exception of rjestat, exist in /usr/rje. These programs are “shared 
text” and are linked (except shqer) to the proper names in each subsystem directory. The names described 
below are generic; the programs in the rje2 directory would be rje2qer, rje2init, etc. 
Each available RJE subsystem occupies three process slots. The slots used are rje?xmit for the transmitter, 
rje?recv for the receiver, and rje?disp for the dispatcher. One additional process slot is used for shqer re- 


gardless of how many subsystems are available. 


Each RJE subsystem tries to be self-sustaining and logs any errors encountered during normal operation 
in its errlog file. 


A.  Rjeqer 
This program is used by send to queue files for transmission. When invoked, it performs the following steps: 
1. Moves temporary pnch(4) format file in spool directory to squeue directory. 
2. Writes an entry at end of file joblog containing: 
e name of file to be transmitted 
e submitter’s user ID 
e number of card images in file 
e message level for this job. 
The file joblog is used to notify rjexmit of work to be done. 
3. Notifies user that file has been queued. 


Send determines which host system is desired and invokes the proper rje?qer by getting the prefix from 
the lines file (e.g., if sending to IBM Cfrom our machine, rje2qer would be invoked). 


B. Rijeload 


This program is used to start an RJE subsystem. Its prefix determines the subsystem to start (e.g., rje2load 
starts rje2). To start the RJE subsystems on UNIX operating system machines, the following commands are 
executed in /ete/re when changing to init state 2 (multiuser): 


rm —f /usr/rje/sque/log 

su rje —c "/usr/rjel/rjelload device " 

su rje —c "/usr/rje2/rje2load devicel " 

[If the V.35 interface (see vpmstart(1C) for 38B-20 only) 
is used for, say, subsystem rjel, 

then use command line: 

su rje —c " V_35=1 /usr/rjel/rjelload device0" | 


Page 161 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


The file /usr/rje/sque/logis removed to ensure the correct operation of shqer. When invoked, rjeload per- 
forms the following steps: 


1. Uses VPM device from /usr/rje/lines to link the proper devices [see vpmset(1C)]. 
2. Loads device given as argument with RJE protocol script. 


3. Executes rje?init to start rje? processes (e.g., rjeZload executes rje2init). 
Cc. Rjehalt 

This program is used to halt an RJE subsystem. To halt rje2on UNIX operating system machines, /usr/ 
rje2/rje2halt is executed. This should be done in the shutdown procedure for your machine to ensure graceful 
termination of RJE. Rjehalt will allow only those users with permission to halt an RJE subsystem. Rjehalt 
uses the header on the file joblog to get the process-group of the RJE subsystem processes. This group is signaled 
to terminate. When all processes have terminated, rjehalt sends a “signoff” record to the host machine. This 
signoff record is taken from the file signoff (ASCII text) if it exists; otherwise, a “/*signoff” record is sent. On 
completion, rjehalt creates the file stopin the subsystem directory. The presence of the file stop in a subsystem 
directory causes rjestat to report to users that RJE to the corresponding host has been stopped by the operator. 


D. Rieinit 


This program initializes an RJE subsystem. It is used by rjeload and can be used to restart a subsystem 
if the VPM script has previously been started. Rjeinit should only be executed by user rje. Rjeinit fails if there 
are less than 100 blocks or 10 inodes free in the file system. It issues a warning if there are less than 1.5X blocks 
(where X is the first field in the parameters for that line) or 100 inodes free in the file system. If rjeinit fails, 
the reason for the failure is reported; and the file dead is created containing “Init failed”. This will be reported 
by rjestat until a subsequent rjeinit succeeds. The rjeinit performs the following functions: 


1. Dials a remote host if specified. 
2. Truncates console response file resp. 


3. Sends a signon record to the host. The signon record is taken from file signon (ASCII text) if it exists; 
otherwise, rjeinit sends a blank record as a signon. 


4. Sets up pipes for process communication. 

5. Resets process-group for RJE subsystem and restarts error logging. 

6. Rebuilds joblog file from jobs queued for transmission. 

7. Notifies rjedisp (via a pipe) of any returned files still remaining in rpool directory. 

8. Starts appropriate background processes rje?xmit, rje?recv, and rje?disp. 

9. Reports started or not started. 

If failure occurs in a background process, it is reported by that process (error logging). The failing process 


will normally attempt to reboot the subsystem by executing rje?init with a + as its argument. When rjeinit 
is executed with + as its argument, this indicates an attempted reboot; and rjeinit will behave differently. 


E. Rjexmit 


This program writes data to the VPM device. The rjexmit is started by rjeinit and runs in the background. 
When running, rjexmit performs the following processing: 


1. Checks .joblog file for files to be transmitted. This is done every 5 seconds when not transmitting data. 
When transmitting data, the joblogis checked after transmitting one block from each active reader and 


Page 162 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 
console. (Readerrefers to the logical readers used by RJE. Console refers to the RJE logical console which 
is separate from the logical readers.) 

2. Queues files from joblog according to first two characters of the file name: 


e rd*—These files are queued on the reader with the fewest cards. Normal use of the send com- 
mand creates these files. 


e sq*—These files are queued on the last available reader to assure sequential transmission. 
Using the —x option to the send command creates these files. 


e co*—These files are queued on the console. The rjestat command creates these files. All files 
described above contain EBCDIC data. 


3. Sends information to rjedisp (via a pipe) for use in user notification of job status. 


4. Builds blocks for transmission from active readers and the console. These blocks are built according to 
the multileaving protocol. 


5. Performs following peripheral control: 


e Sends requests to open readers when jobs have been assigned to them. These readers are not 
active until a grant is received from rjereev (via a pipe). 


e Halts and activates readers when waits or starts (respectively) are received from rjerecv. 
e Sends printer or punch grants when an open request is received from rjerecv. 

6. Notifies rjedisp that a file has been transmitted and unlinks the file. 

If rjexmit encounters fatal errors, it creates the dead file with an appropriate message and signals the 
other background processes to exit. If possible, rjexmit will attempt to reboot the RJE subsystem by executing 
rjeinit. 

F. Rjerecv 


This program reads data from the VPM device. The rjerecv is started by rjeinit and runs in the back- 
ground. When running, rjerecv performs the following processing: 


1. Reads blocks of data received from host system. 
2. Handles data received according to its type. The two types of data are: 
e Control information—Rjerecv performs the following peripheral device control: 
a. Notifies rjexmit of grants to its requests to open readers. 
b. Passes wait and start reader information to rjexmit. 
c. Passes open requests (for printers and punches) from the host to rjexmit. 
e User Information—The three major types of user information received are: 


a. Console responses and job status messages. This data is appended to the resp file 
for use by rjestat and rjedisp. 


Page 163 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


b. The printer output from user jobs. This data is collected in temporary files (pr*) in the 
rpool directory. When a complete print job has been received, rjerecv notifies rjedisp 
(via a pipe) that the file is to be dispatched. 


c. The punch output from user jobs. This data is handled the same as printer output except 
that the rpool files are named pu* 


3. If console response file resp exceeds 70,000 characters, rjereecv truncates file. 


4, Rjerecv stops accepting output from the remote machine if the number of free blocks in the file system 
falls below space blocks. 


5. Rjerecvy truncates files to size blocks if a received file exceeds this value. 


If rjerecv encounters fatal errors, it creates the dead file with an appropriate error message, signals the 
other background processes to exit, and reboots the RJE subsystem. 


G. Rijedisp 


This program dispatches user information. Rjedisp is started by rjeinit and runs in the background. When 
running, rjedisp performs the following processing: 


1. Dispatches output. The two types of output are printer and punch output. After receiving notification 
of output ready from rjerecv, rjedisp searches for a “usr=” line in the received file. The format of a 
“usr=” line is as follows: 

usr=(user,place,level) 
Rjedisp dispatches output according to the place field. 


2. Dispatches messages. The three types of messages are as follows: 


e Job transmitted—This message is sent to the submitting user when rjedisp reads this event 
notice from the rjexmit pipe. 


e Job acknowledgment—rjedisp dispatches IBM acknowledgment messages to submitting users. 
e Output processing—rjedisp dispatches job output messages according to the options specified 
on the “usr=” card. A normal output message indicates the returned file name is ready. Messages 


can be masked by using the Jevel on the “usr=” card. 


3. Whenever output is to be handled by shqer, rjedisp checks that shqer is running. This is done by look- 
ing for the shger Jog file. If this file does not exist, rjedisp starts shqer. 


H. Shqer 

This program executes user programs when they appear in the place field of the “usr=” line in a returned 
output file (print or punch), Shqer is started by rjedisp when the first output file using this feature is re- 
turned. Subsequent files using this feature are logged for execution by rjedisp. When started, shqer performs 


the following processing: 


1. Builds the Jog file from file names in /usr/rje/sque directory. Each log entry is the name of a file (tmp?) 
that contains the following information: 


e name of file to be executed 


Page 164 


6/82 


ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


name of input file (file returned from IBM) 


name of IBM job 


programmer’s name 


IBM job number 


user’s name from “usr=” line 


user’s login directory 


minimum file system space. 


Se 2. Shqer uses two parameters. The first is the delay time between log file reads. The second is a nice(2) 
factor which is applied to any programs spawned by shqer. These values are defined in 
/usr/include/rje.h (QDELA Y and QNICE). 


3. When each log entry is read, the appropriate program is spawned with the following characteristics: 


e The returned RJE file is standard input to the program. 


e The standard and diagnostic outputs are /dev/null. 


e The LOGNAME, HOME, and TZ variables are set to appropriate values. 


e The arguments to the spawned program, in order, are: 


a. 


d. 


e. 


a numerical value indicating that file system free space is equal or above (0) or 
below (1) space blocks. 


IBM job name. 
programmer’s name. 
IBM job number. 


user’s login name. 


4. After executing each program, the tmp? file and returned RJE file are removed. 


© UTILITY PROGRAMS 


A. Snoop 


Snoop is the generic name of a program that can be used to trace the state of a VPM device and its associ- 
ated communications line. Snoop depends on the trace(7) driver for its information. It reads trace entries from 
/dev/trace and converts them into a readable form that is printed on the standard output. 


The usable name of snoop for a particular RJE subsystem is snoopN, where N is the minor device number 
of the VPM device. In our hypothetical system, vpm0 is used by the rjel subsystem; and vpm1 is used by the 


rje2 subsystem. Therefore, /usr/rjel/snoop0 and /usr/rje2/snoop] are linked to /usr/rje/snoop. 


Page 165 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


Each snoop prints trace entries for its associated VPM device. Trace entries are printed in the following & 
form: 


« 
sequence type information 


where: 


e sequence specifies the order of trace occurrences. It is a value between 0 and 99. & 
e type specifies the action being traced (e.g., transfers, driver activity). 
e information describes data being transferred and driver activity. 


Refer to Table 10.A for the meaning of the trace types and associated information. 


B. Rjestat & 


This program is supplied as a user command. The program’s two functions are to describe the status of the 
RJE subsystems and to provide a remote IBM status console. The remainder of this part describes these two 
functions. 


RJE Status 


When invoked, rjestat reports the status of the RJE subsystems. If remote system (“host”) names are spec- 
ified, only those statuses are reported. The rjestat uses the following rules to report the status of a subsystem: 


e Rjestat prints the contents of the file statusif it exists in the subsystem directory. This file can contain 
any message the administrator wishes to have printed when users use rjestat. 


e Ifthe file dead exists in the subsystem’s directory, the subsystem is not operating and the reason is con- 
tained in the file. The rjestat reports that RJE to “host” is down and prints the contents of the dead 
file as the reason. 


e If the file stop exists in the subsystems directory, the rjehalt program has been used to inhibit that 
RJE subsystem. Rjestat reports that RJE to “host” has been stopped by the operator. 


e If neither the dead nor the stop file exists, rjestat reports that RJE to “host” is operating normally. 


Rjestat is supplied as the user’s vehicle for checking the status of RJE. It is not meant to be an administra- 
tive tool; however, the reason for failure can be used to track the problem. 


Status Console 


To use rjestat as a status console, the —s host argument is used. Rjestat prints the status of the subsystem, 
then prompts with host: if the subsystem is up. Each console request is submitted to the RJE processes for trans- 
mission, and output is handled as specified. Rjestat checks the status prior to submitting each request and will 
tell the user to try later if the subsystem goes down. Rjestat allows the rje or superuser logins to submit other 
than display requests. For a complete description of how to use the status console features, see rjestat(1C). 


Cc. Cvt 


This program converts any subsystem’s joblog file to readable form. The first line printed is the process 
group number of the subsystem processes. The remaining output consists of entries in the following form: 


file user-id records level 


where “file” is the name of the submitted file, “user-id” is the submitters user number, “records” is the number 
of card images, and “level” is the message level. The “records” and “level” fields are not used if the file name 
is co* (console request submitted by rjestat). 


Page 166 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


RJE ACCOUNTING 
Each RJE subsystem will store seeming information in the acctlog file if it exists. It is the responsibility 
of the RJE administrator to create and maintain this file in the subsystem’s directory. Entries in this file de- 
scribe RJE line use and are of the following form: 
day time file user records 
Each field is delimited by a tab character. The meanings of each field is as follows: 
1. day—The day of occurrence in the form mm/dd. 
2. time—The time of occurrence in the form hh:mm:ss. 
3. file—The name of the UNIX system file. The first two characters identify its type as follows: 
e rd/sq—The file was transmitted to the remote system. 
e pr—The print output file was received from the remote system. 
e pu—The punch output file was received from the remote system. 
4, user—The user ID of the user responsible for the transfer. 


5. records—The number of records (card images) transferred for this file. 


Since acctlog data is not used by RJE, it should not be allowed to grow too large. This can be accomplished 
by moving or processing the file during a system reboot (i.e., in /etc/re before the RJE subsystems are started). 


The following list describes some of the reports that could be generated from the acctlog data. Implementa- 
tion of a program to produce accounting reports is the responsibility of the administrator. 


e Periodic Reports—By using the “day” and “time” fields in the data, periodic usage reports can 
be produced. 


e By User Reports—By using the “user” field in the data, usage-by-user reports can be produced. 

e By Subsystem Reports—By using the /usr/rje/lines file information and each acctlog file, a us- 
age-by-subsystem (or remote system) report can be produced, Other reports can be produced 
using the type of file, size of jobs, etc. 


TROUBLESHOOTING 


This section deals with RJE problems and some methods for resolving them. The topics discussed in this 
section are as follows: 


e Automatic Error Recovery 
e Manual Error Recovery 

e RJE Problems 

e VPM Problems 


e Trace Interpretation. 


Page 167 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


A. Automatic Error Recovery 

RJE attempts to be self-sustaining with respect to its availability. In general, if problems occur on the com- 
munications line or the remote machine (e.g., a crash), RJE will continually try to restart itself (this action will 
be referred to as “reboot”). For example, if an RJE subsystem is started using rjeload but the IBM system is 
not available, a fatal error will occur. The process that detects this error (usually rjexmit or rjerecv) will 
reboot the subsystem by executing rjeinit with a + as its argument. When rjeinit detects a + argument, it waits 
1 minute before attempting to bring up the subsystem. 

The rjehalt program can be used to prevent an RJE subsystem from rebooting itself when the remote sys- 
tem is not available for a known period of time. When the remote system is made available, the subsystem may 
be started in the normal way. 


B. Manual Error Recovery 


In order to manually recover from errors, one must know how to start and stop an RJE subsystem. There 
are two ways to start an RJE subsystem: 


e rje?load—This program loads and starts the VPM script and executes rje?init. 


e rje?init—This program starts the rje? subsystem. In order to use this program, the VPM script must 
be loaded and started. 


To stop the rje? subsystem, the rje?halt program should be executed. This stops the subsystem gracefully 
and will prevent a reboot. 


The rjeload program must be used to start RJE for the first time (after a UNIX system reboot). Subse- 
quently, as long as the script is running, execution sequences of rjehalt and rjeinit will stop and start RJE. 


Manually starting and stopping RJE can be useful in tracking down problems. For example, if user jobs are 
not being submitted to the host machine, the following sequence can ease identification of the problem: 


1. Halt ailing subsystem. 

2. Start a snoop process in the background with its output redirected to a file. 
3. Restart subsystem. 

4. Scan snoop output to determine where the problem is. 


The snoop program is the most useful software tool for identifying RJE problems. Its uses are described 
in the subpart “Trace Interpretation”. 


C. RJE Problems 


This section describes problems that can occur in an RJE subsystem. These problems generally occur when 
the subsystem has not been set up properly. The following is a list of things to check to ensure that an RJE sub- 
system has been set up properly. 


1. IBM description—The description of the remote UNIX machine must be consistent with the description 
in the subpart “IBM Generation”. 


2. UNIX system description—The file /usr/rje/lines must be set up properly. The subpart “UNIX System 
Generation” describes this file in detail. 


Page 168 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


3. VPM setup—The VPM software must be installed and the proper VPM and physical devices made. Hach 
@ VPM device must correspond to the proper physical device; see vpm(7). 


4. Free space—As a general rule, all file systems must have a reasonable amount of free space. File systems 
containing RJE subsystems must have sufficient free space to ensure proper RJE operation. 


& 5. Directories—Each subsystem’s directory and the controlling directory should be checked for the follow- 
ing: 


e All needed files exist. 

e The proper prefix is on each applicable RJE program. 

e The link count is correct for files that are linked. 
& e All file and directory modes are correct. 


6. Initialization—Peripherals information must be consistent on both systems. The line must be started on 
the IBM system, proper hardware connections made, etc. 


Problems with a subsystem are indicated by error messages. The rjeinit checks for obstacles in bringing 
up RJE. If an obstacle is found, an error message indicating the obstacle is printed on the error output. If a prob- 
lem is encountered during normal operation, the message is logged in the errlog file. This file, error messages, 
output from snoop, and the checklist above should be used to determine and fix any subsystem problems. Gen- 


erally, if a subsystem is set up properly but will not operate, the problem is the way the VPM or KMC has been 
set up, the remote system, or the hardware. 


@ D. VPM Problems 


After installing the hardware and making the appropriate devices, all VPM software and devices must be 
made [see vpm(7)]. The program rjeload links the devices to be used by the corresponding RJE subsystem. 


The following is a list of items to check when problems occur: 


1. Proper hardware—The appropriate hardware must be installed. Be sure the device is properly described 
to the system and passes diagnostics. 


2. Proper devices—The major and minor device numbers for the physical device and VPM devices must be 
correct. It should also be verified that rjeload program is called with the correct device names. 


3. Seript runs—Verify the VPM script is able to run. This is done by tracing the proper device with the 
& proper snoop program. Snoop will print “started” entries for both the physical device and VPM script. 
If no output appears from snoop when rjeload is executed, either the hardware is not working properly 
or the hardware or VPM has not been set up properly. Output of any other type from snoop should indi- 
cate where the problem is occurring. 
E. Trace Interpretation 
& This part describes how to interpret trace output from the snoop program and gives several examples. 
Lines with type TR are traces from the VPM script. All others are driver traces and indicate the following: 


e CL—Activity occurring when the device has been closed. 


€ e OP—Activity occurring when the device has been opened. 


Page 169 


SE ee ee ee ee ee ee eee ee ee ee re ee Se 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


e RD—Read from device occurred. 


e WR—Write to device occurred. 
e ST—Start or stop activity. 


e SC—Script termination type, termination value is given. 


Table 10.A enumerates all possible trace lines for each type and describes the event. The remainder of this 
part consists of example trace output and its interpretation. Comments describing events will appear after the 
“*” in trace output. If more than one VPM were running, sequence numbers might not appear in order. For clari- 
ty, example sequences will be in order. 


Normal RJE Startup 


The following is an example of trace output when RJE has been started up. In this case the remote machine 
responds to the enquiry byte (ENQ). The RJE subsystem signs on to the machine then follows the handshaking 
protocol (exchanging ACKs). 


Tracing device0 


0 ST Startack * Physical device started 
ee Started * Script started 
22597 Start * VPM Driver start 
SEO Opened * VPM Device open 
4 WR __ 84 bytes * Signon record written 
5-— TR 5-ENQ * Enquiry byte sent 
cere R-ACK * Received acknowledgment 
et S-BLK * Sent signon block 
8o-=tR R-ACK * Block acknowledged 
STR S-ACK * Handshaking 
10> --ER R-ACK * e 
1) Geet BY 5S-ACK . ° 
12 TR R-ACK sd ° 
18 TR S-ACK - ° 
a Weed il 2 R-ACK * e 
15S SER S-ACK = ° 
16=5 ER R-ACK . e 
17 2ER 5-ACK * Handshaking 


If any jobs had been submitted via the send command or jobs were waiting to be returned, the traces would 
reflect the transfers rather than handshaking. 


RJE Startup—IBM Not Responding 


This example shows trace output when RJE has been started but does not receive a response from the remote 
machine. In general, the RJE script will time-out if a response is not received from the remote machine within 
3 seconds of the last transmission. When a time-out is detected while starting up, the ENQ is retransmitted. 
This is, repeated six times before the script gives up. Other time-out responses will be discussed later. 


Page 170 


6/82 


ISSUE 1 

Tracing device0 
86 ST Startack . 
87 TR Started x 
88 ST Start = 
89> OP Opened : 
90 WR 84 bytes © 
Ol TR S-ENQ ? 
92° PR TIME-OUT * 
93--S TR 5-ENQ 8 
94 TR TIME-OUT ba 
95: TR S-ENQ = 
96 TR TIME-OUT e 
fae 5S-ENQ = 
98 TR TIME-OUT x 
99 TR S-ENQ ig 
peed be 3 TIME-OUT "i 
Ka PR S-ENQ + 
BTR TIME-OUT = 
Soke 1 bytes x 
eto & Stopchk s 
5 ST Stopack(0) es 
6. GE Clean = 
TR as Stopped x“ 
8 CL Closed = 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


Physical device started 
Script started 

VPM driver start 
VPM device open 
Signon record written 
Enquiry byte sent 

No response to enquiry 
Enquiry byte sent 

No response 

Enquiry byte sent 

No response 

Enquiry byte sent 

No response 

Enquiry byte sent 

No response 

Enquiry byte sent 

No response 

1 byte read (error) 
Safety check 

Script termination normal 
Cleanup done 

VPM script stopped 
VPM device closed 


The above sequence will be repeated approximately every minute until a positive response is received from 
the host. During that minute, the RJE subsystem is dormant; and the rjestat command will report that IBM 
is not responding. When this occurs, either the IBM machine is not available, down, line not started, etc.; or there 
is a communications problem somewhere from where the physical device transmits data to where it receives 


data. The RJE administrator should first verify that the IBM machine is up, and the communications line has 


been started. If so, a hardware trace of the communications line should be done to aid in detecting the problem. 


Transmitting and Receiving 


This example shows trace output from the start of job transmission through its return. For simplicity, only 


one job is being transmitted and returned. 


Page 171 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


Page 172 


Tracing device0 


R-ACK 
S-ACK 
R-ACK 
S-ACK 

4 bytes 
R-ACK 
5-BLK 
R-OKBLK 
S-ACK 

7 bytes 
R-ACK 
S-ACK 
481 bytes 
470 bytes 
R-ACK 
S-BLK 
R-ACK 
470 bytes 
S-BLK 
R-OKBLK 
470 bytes 
66 bytes 
5-BLK 
R-ACK 
147 bytes 
S-BLK 
R-ACK 


R-ACK 
S-ACK 
R-OKBLK 
S-ACK 
7 bytes 
R-ACK 
8-ACK 
R-ACK 
S-ACK 
R-ACK 


ISSUE 1 


+ €£ &* & © # #F HB HH HH HE HH HF HH HB HH HF HH HH KF HH HF KH HB HF KH KH HH KF KH HH HF KK HH HF HK KH HF HF ¥ 


Handshaking 
a 


ry 
Handshaking 

Open reader request written 
Handshaking 

Sent open request block 
Received block (grant) 
Block acknowledged 

Read seven bytes (grant) 
Handshaking 

Handshaking 

First block written 

Second block written 
Handshaking 

First block sent 

Block acknowledged 

Third block written 

Second block sent 


Received block (on reader msg) 


Fourth block written 


Read 66 bytes (on reader msg) 


Third block sent 
Block acknowledged 
Fifth block written 
Fourth block sent 
Block acknowledged 


More of the same 


Handshaking 
Handshaking 
Received block (request) 
Block acknowledged 
Read open printer request 
Handshaking 

° 


6/82 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


ae eae 5-ACK Handshaking 
4 WR ‘4 bytes Printer grant written 
5. ER R-ACK Handshaking 
6: TR 8-BLK Block sent (grant) 
7. ER R-OKBLK First block received 
& $--ER S8-ACK Block acknowledged 
9 RD 64 bytes Read first block 


10). TR R-OKBLK 
ieeoTR S-ACK 

12- RD 505 bytes 
13D R-OKBLK 
14 TR S-ACK 

Th, TR R-OKBLK 


16 TR S-ACK 
by pas 4 R-ACK 


Second block received 
Block acknowledged 
Read second block 
Third block received 
Block acknowledged 
Fourth block received 
Block acknowledged 


Handshaking 
18 TR S-ACK ° 
19° TR R-ACK r) 
20 TR S-ACK Handshaking 


21 RD 470 bytes 
22 VEE 494 bytes 
OS me R-ACK 
24 ‘TR S-ACK 


Read third block 
Read fourth block 
Handshaking 
Handshaking 


etc. 


*eeweente#e%w+ete#+#s+#**2#+# * ££ + + £ * * © & & © 


& Requests and grants are part of the multileaving protocol. When jobs are being transmitted and received 
simultaneously, as in a busier RJE subsystem, much less handshaking is involved. Rather than acknowledging 
blocks with ACKs, the protocol allows a block to be returned (this implies acknowledgment of the received 
block). The following example shows trace output at a busy time: 


tracing device0 

pL oieel it R-OKBLK 
46 TR S-BLK 

47 WR _ 493 bytes 
48 RD 496 bytes 
49 TR R-OKBLK 

€ 50 RD 65 bytes 

51 WR 4 bytes 

52 TR S8-BLK 

3 Ses Ane R-OKBLK 
Bas ey 8-BLK 

55 WR _ 493 bytes 
56 =RD 7 bytes 


Received block 
Sent block 


Received block 


Sent block 
Received block 
Sent block 


Bisolay R-OKBLK Received block 
w 58 WR 493 bytes 
59 RD 496 bytes 


ee % © & & & EH HB HE HH KR HE HH KH 


Sent block 
Received block 


60 TR S-BLK 
6 TR R-OKBLK 


Page 173 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


Notice that since there is work to be done on both sides acknowledgments are implied. 


Time-out Error Recovery 


This example shows activity resulting from time-outs occurring during normal operation. These time-outs 
were caused because the remote JES3 system has performance problems, and occasionally, does not respond in 
the required 3 seconds. 


Time-Out Error Recovery 


Tracing devicel 


PA ped a is S-ACK * Handshaking 
28h R-ACK * e 
29. TR S-ACK ms e 
30 TR TIME-OUT * No response e 
bt oon 2 S-NAK * Not acknowledged 
32.) 2K TIME-OUT * No response 
raed bt S-NAK * Not acknowledged 
Dae R-ACK * “Response 
35 TR S-ACK * Handshaking 
36 «TR R-ACK re e 

r : e 

e x 8 

e * e 
54 TR R-ACK * ® 
552 eR S-ACK * Handshaking 
56 TR TIME-OUT * No response 
Be. on S-NAK * Not acknowledged 
58°" R-ACK * Response 
59 TR S-ACK * Handshaking 

e 

a 


The response to these time-outs are NAKs (not acknowledged). RJE will respond this way up to six times 
before giving up and attempting a reboot. At this time rjestat would report that there are “Line Errors”. NAK 
is a request to retransmit the previous response. 


Communication Line Errors 


This example shows trace output from an RJE subsystem that uses a dial-up connection. The phone line & 
is noisy and is prone to dropping. 


‘ 


Page 174 


6/82 ISSUE 1 


Tracing vpml 


62.= TR S-ACK = 
64 TR R-ACK . 
65 TR 5-ACK . 
66 TR R-JUNK x 
64-2 S-NAK > 
68 TR R-ACK * 
69 TR S-ACK = 
OL R-ACK “3 
Wie = hh §-ACK f 
12. RR TIME-OUT 
73-—— TR, S-NAK Be 
(45 TR TIME-OUT & 
(Gea We S-NAK 3 
NG-= ER TIME-OUT ss 
i Goes S-NAK * 
(SSR TIME-OUT ss 
79 TR S-NAK = 
80 TR TIME-OUT e 
81> =TR S-NAK z 
82 TR TIME-OUT ms 
838 RD 1 bytes “2 
84 ST Stopack(0) “ 
8 CL Clean + 
86 ST Stopped : 
87 CL Closed . 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


Handshaking 

& 

e 
Noise on the line 
Not acknowledged 
Recovery 


Line has dropped 
Attempting to recover 
® 


® 
1 byte read (error) 
Script termination normal 
Cleanup 
VPM script stopped 
VPM device closed 


The error read in the above sequence causes RJE to reboot and rjestat to report line errors. If this type 
of thing were to occur frequently, a different method of communication should be used. 


Error Responses 


As seen in the parts above, the response to most errors is to send a NAK. The only exception is when starting 
up. Whenever a NAK is received on either side, it indicates that the previous transmission was not properly 
received. This should be followed by retransmission of the previous data. Generally, NAKs should not occur fre- 
quently and should be followed by recovery. If errors occur frequently or NAKs do not cause recovery, the line 


should be checked for problems. 


On some IBM systems (e.g., JES2), an I/O error is printed at the system console whenever a NAK is received. 
These I/O errors can also be helpful in detecting the problem; however, they will not be discussed here as they 
vary with the system. It is assumed that someone in IBM support can assist if needed. 


Page 175 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


TABLE 10.A 
Ce. Ue 
CL | Closed The VPM device has been closed. 


Clean The VPM driver is cleaning up for this device. 


Opened 
Failed (start) 


num bytes 


The VPM has been successfully opened. 
The open failed because the script within the physical device could not be started. 
Num bytes were read from the VPM device by rjereev. 


The VPM script has terminated abnormally. The VPM termination code is num. 
Termination codes are defined in vpm(7). 


Exit (num) 


Startack 
Stopchk 


The physical device acknowledges that it has been started. 
Safety wakeup check on stop procedure. 


Stopack (num) | The physical device acknowledges that it is being halted by the vpm device. The 


VPM termination code is num. Termination codes are defined in vpm(7). 


The VPM script has been stopped. 


Stopped 
Started 
R-ACK 


The script has started tracing. 


A 2-byte acknowledgment (ACK) string has been received from the remote sys- 
tem. This indicates that the previous transmission was properly received. 


8-ACK A 2-byte acknowledgment (ACK) string has been transmitted to the remote sys- 


tem. 


R-NAK 


A “not-acknowledged” (NAK) character has been received from the remote sys- 
tem. This indicates that the previous transmission was not properly received. 


S-NAK A “not-acknowledged” (NAK) character has been transmitted to the remote sys- 


tem. 


R-ENQ 
S-ENQ 
R-WAIT 
R-OKBLK 
R-ERRBLK 
R-SEQERR 
R-JUNK 
TIME-OUT 
S-BLK 
WR | num bytes 


An enquiry (ENQ) character has been received from the remote system. 
An enquiry (ENQ) character has been transmitted to the remote system. 


The remote machine has requested that no data be transmitted to it. 


A valid data block was received from the remote machine. 


An invalid Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) was received with a data block. 


The block sequence count on a received data block was invalid. 


An invalid data block was received from the remote system. 


The remote machine did not respond within 3 seconds. 


A data block has been transmitted to the remote system. 


Num bytes were written to the VPM device by rjexmit. 


Page 176 


