6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


11. UNIX SYSTEM ACTIVITY PACKAGE 
General 


This section describes the design and implementation of the UNIX System Activity. Package. The UNIX op- 
erating system contains a number of counters that are incremented as various system actions occur. The system 
activity package reports UNIX system-wide measurements including Central Processing Unit(CPU) utilization, 
disk and tape Input/Output(I/O) activities, terminal device activity, buffer usage, system calls, system switch- 
ing and swapping, file-access activity, queue activity, and message and semaphore activities. The package pro- 
vides four commands that generate various types of reports. Procedures that automatically generate daily 
reports are also included. The five functions of the activity package are: 


e sar(1) command—allows a user to generate system activity reports in real-time and to save system ac- 
tivities in a file for later usage. 


e sag(1G) command—displays system activity in a graphical form. 


e sadp(1) command—samples disk activity once every second during a specified time interval and reports 
disk usage and seek distance in either tabular or histogram form. 


e timex(1)—a modified time(1) command that times a command and also reports concurrent system ac- 
tivity. 


e system activity daily reports—procedures are provided for sampling and saving system activities in a 
data file periodically and for generating the daily report from the data file. 


The system activity information reported by this package is derived from a set of system counters located 
in the operation system kernel. These system counters are described in the part “System Activity Counters”, 
The part “System Activity Commands” describes the commands provided by this package. The procedure for 
generating daily reports is given in “Daily Report Generation”. A description for each of the files used by the 
system activity package can be found in Attachment 11.1. 


System Activity Counters 


The UNIX operating system manages a number of counters that record various activities and provide the 
basis for the system activity reporting system. The data structure for most of these counters is defined in the 
sysinfo structure (see Attachment 11.2) in /usr/include/sys/sysinfo.h. The system table overflow counters are 
kept in the _syserr structure. The device activity counters are extracted from the device status tables. In this 
version, the I/O activity of the following devices is recorded: RP06, RM05, RS04, RF11, RK05, RP0O3, RLO2, TM038, 
and TM11. 


In the following paragraphs, the system activity counters that are sampled by the system activity package 
are described. 


Cpu time counters: There are four time counters that may be incremented at each clock interrupt 60 times 
per second. Exactly one of the cpu|| counters is incremented on each interrupt, according to the mode the CPU 


is in at the interrupt; idle, user, kernal, and wait for I/O completion. 


Lread and Iwrite: The /read and /write counters are used to count logical read and write requests issued 
by the system to block devices. 


Bread and bwrite: The bread and bwrite counters are used to count the number of times data is trans- 
ferred between the system buffers and the block devices. These actual I/Os are triggered by logical I/Os that 


Page 177 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


cannot be satisfied by the current contents of the buffers. The ratio of block I/O to logical I/O is a common mea- 
sure of the effectiveness of the system buffering. 


Phread and phwrite: The phread and phwrite counters count read and write requests issued by the 
system to raw devices. 


Swapin and swapout: The swapinand swapout counters are incremented for each system request initiat- 
ing a transfer from or to the swap device. More than one request is usually involved in bringing a process into 
memory, or out, because text and data are handled separately. Frequently used programs are kept on the swap 
device and are swapped in rather than loaded from the file system. The swapin counter reflects these initial 
loading operations as well as resumptions of activity, while the swapout counter reveals the level of actual 
“swapping.” The amount of data transferred between the swap device and memory are measured in blocks and 
counted by bswapin and bswapout. 


Pswitch and syscall: These counters are related to the managementof multiprogramming. Syseall is in- 
cremented every time a system call is invoked. The numbers of invocations of read(2), write(2), fork(2), and 
exec(2) system calls are kept in counters sysread, syswrite, sysfork, and sysexec, respectively. Pswitch counts 
the times the switcher was invoked, which occurs when: 


a. a system call resulted in a road block 
b. an interrupt occurred resulting in awakening a higher priority process 
c. 1-second clock interrupt. 


Iget, namei, and dirblk: These counters apply to file-access operations. Iget and namei, in particular, are 
the names of UNIX operating system routines. The counters record the number of times that the respective rou- 
tines are called. Nameiis the routine that performs file system path searches. It searches the various directory 
files to get the associated i-number of a file corresponding to a special path. Iget is a routine called to locate 
the inode entry of a file (i-number). It first searches the in-core inode table. If the inode entry is not in the table, 
routine iget will get the inode from the file system where the file resides and make an entry in the in-core inode 
table for the file. Iget returns a pointer to this entry. Namei calls iget, but other file access routines also call 
iget. Therefore, counter iget is always greater than counter namei. 


Counter dirblk records the number of directory block reads issued by the system. It is noted that the direc- 
tory blocks read divided by the number of namei calls estimates the average path length of files. 


Runque, runocc, swpque, and swpocc: These counters are used to record queue activities. They are im- 
plemented in the clock.c routine. At every 1 second interval, the clock routine examines the process table to see 
whether any processes are in core and in ready state. If so, the counter runoce is incremented and the number 
of such processes are added to counter runque. While examining the process table, the clock routine also checks 
whether any processes in the swap device are in ready state. The counter swpocc is incremented if the swap 
queue is occupied, and the number of processes in swap queue is added to counter swpque. 


Readch and writech: The readch and writech counters record the total number of bytes (characters) 
transferred by the read and write system calls, respectively. 


Monitoring terminal device activities: There are six counters monitoring terminal device activities. 
Revint, xmtint, and mdmint are counters measuring hardware interrupt occurrences for receiver, transmitter, 
and modem individually. Rawch, canch, and outch count number of characters in the raw queue, canonical 
queue, and output queue. Characters generated by devices operating in the cooked mode, such as terminals, are 
counted in both rawch and (as edited) in canch, but characters from raw devices, such as communication proces- 
sors, are counted only in rawch. 


Msg and sema counters: These counters record message sending and receiving activities and semaphore 
operations, réspectively. 


Page 178 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


Monitoring I/O activities: As to the I/O activity for a disk or tape device, four counters are kept for each 
disk or tape drive in the device status table. Counter io_opsis incremented when an I/O operation has occurred 
on the device. It includes block 1/0, swap I/O, and physical I/O. Io_bent counts the amount of data transferred 
between the device and memory in 512 byte units. Jo_act and io_resp measure the active time and response time 
of a device in time ticks summed over all I/O requests that have completed for each device. The device active 
time includes the device seeking, rotating and data transferring times, while the response time of an I/O opera- 
tion is from the time the I/O request is queued to the device to the time when the I/O completes. 


Inodeovf, fileovf, textovf, and procovf: These counters are extracted from _syserr structure. When an 
overflow occurs in any of the inode, file, text and process tables, the corresponding overflow counter is incre- 
mented. 


System Activity Commands 


The system activity package provides three commands for generating various system activity reports and 
one command for profiling disk activities. These tools facilitate observation of system activity during 


e acontrolled stand-alone test of a large system 
e an uncontrolled run of a program to observe the operating environment 
e normal production operation. 


Commands sar and sag permit the user to specify a sampling interval and number of intervals for examin- 
ing system activity and then to display the observed level of activity in tabular or graphical form. The timex 
command reports the amount of system activity that occurred during the precise period of execution of a timed 
command. The sadp command allows the user to establish a sampling period during which access location and 
seek distance on specified disks are recorded and later displayed as a tabular summary or as a histogram. 


The “sar’’ command 
The sar command can be used in the following ways: 


e When the frequency arguments t and n are specified, it invokes the data collection program sade to 
sample the system activity counters in the operating system every t seconds for n intervals and gener- 
ates system activity reports in real-time. Generally, it is desirable to include the option to save the sam- 
pled data in a file for later examination. The format of the data file is shown in sar(8). In addition to 
the system counters, a time stamp is also included. It gives the time at which the sample was taken. 


e If no frequency arguments are supplied, it generates system activity reports for a specified time interval 
from an existing data file that was created by sar at an earlier time. 


A convenient usage is to run sar as a background process, saving its samples in a temporary file but sending 
its standard output to /dev/null. Then an experiment is conducted after which the system activity is extracted 
from the temporary file. The sar(1) manual entry describes the usage and lists various types of reports. Attach- 
ment 11.3 gives formula for deriving each reported item. 


The “sag” command 
Sag displays system activity data graphically. It relies on the data file produced by a prior run of sar after 
which any column of data or the combination of columns of data of the sar report can be plotted. A fairly simple 


but powerful command syntax allows the specification of cross plots or time plots. Data items are selected using 
the sar column header names. The sar(1G) manual entry describes its options and usage. The system activity 


Page 179 


ADMINISTRATOR'S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


graphical program invokes graphics(1G) and tplot(1G) commands to have the graphical output displayed on 
any of the terminal types supported by tplot. 


The “timex” command 


The timex command is an extension of the time(1) command. Without options, timex behaves exactly like 
time. In addition to giving the time information, it also prints a system activity report derived from the system 
counters. The manual entry timex(1) explains its usage. It should be emphasized that the user and sys times 
reported i in the second and third lines are for the measured process itself wens’ all its children while the 
remaining data (including the cpu user % and cpu sys %) are for the entire system 


While the normal use of timex will probably be to measure a single command, multiple commands can also 
be timed; either by combining them in an executable file and timing it, or more concisely, by typing: 


timex sh —c "ecmd1; emd2; ... ;" 


This establishes the necessary parent-child relationships to correctly extract the user and system times con- 
sumed by emd1,emd2, . . . (and the shell). 


The “sadp” command 


Sadp is a user level program that can be invoked independently by any user. It requires no storage or extra 
code in the operating system and allows the user to specify the disks to be monitored. The program is reawak- 
ened every second, reads system tables from /dev/kmem, and extracts the required information. Because of the 
1 second sampling, only a small fraction of disk requests are observed; however, comparative studies have shown 
that the statistical determination of disk locality is adequate when sufficient samples are collected. 


In the operating system, there is an iobuffor each disk drive. It contains two pointers which are head and 
tail of the I/O active queue for the device. The actual requests in the queue may be found in three buffer header 
pools—system buffer headers for block I/O requests, physical buffer headers for physical I/O requests, and 
swap buffer headers for swap I/O. Each buffer header has a forward pointer which points to the next request 
in the I/O active queue and a backward pointer which points to the previous request. 


Sadp snapshots the iobufof the monitored device and the three buffer header pools once every second dur- 
ing the monitoring period. It then traces the requests in the I/O queue, records the disk access location, and 
seeks distance in buckets of 8 cylinder increments. At the end of monitoring period, it prints out the sampled 
data. The output of sadp can be used to balance load among disk drives and to rearrange the layout of a particu- 
lar disk pack. The usage of this command is described in manual entry sadp(1). 


Daily Report Generation 


The previous part described the commands available to users to initiate activity observations. It is probably 
desirable for each installation to routinely monitor and record system activity in a standard way for historical 
analysis. This part describes the steps that a system administrator may follow to automatically produce a stan- 
dard daily report of system activity. 


Facilities 


e sadc—The executable module of sadc.c (see Attachment 11.1) which reads system counters from /dev/ 
kmem and records them to a file. In addition to the file argument, two frequency arguments are usually 
specified to indicate the sampling interval and number of samples to be taken. In case no frequency ar- 
guments are given, it writes a dummy record in the file to indicate a system restart. 


e sal—The shell procedure that invokes sade to write system counters in the daily data file Ausr/ 
adm/sa dd where dd represents the day of the month. It may be invoked with sampling interval and 
iterations as arguments. 


Page 180 


6/82 ISSUE 1 ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


e sa2—The shell procedure that invokes the sar command to generate daily report /usr/adm/sa/sar dd 
from the daily data file /usr/adm/sa/sa dd. It also removes daily data files and report files after 7 days. 
The starting and ending times and all report options of sar are applicable to sa2. 


Suggested Operational Setup 


It is suggested that the cron(1M) control the normal data collection and report generation operations. For 
example, the sample entries in /usr/lib/crontab: 


0 * * * 0,6 su sys —c "/usr/lib/sa/sal " 
0 18- * * 1-5 su sys —c "/usr/lib/sa/sal " 
0 8-17 * * 1-5 su sys —c "/usr/lib/sa/sal 1200 3" 


would cause the data collection program sadc to be invoked every hour on the hour. Moreover, depending on 
the arguments presented, it writes data to the data file one to three times at every 20 minutes. Therefore, under 
the control of cron(1M), the data file is written every 20 minutes between 8:00 and 18:00 on weekdays and hourly 
at other times. 


Note that data samples are taken more frequently during prime time on weekdays to make them available 
for a finer and more detailed graphical display. It is suggested that sal be invoked hourly rather than invoking 
it once every day; this ensures that if the system crashes data collection will be resumed within an hour after 
the system is restarted. 


Because system activity counters restart from zero when the system is restarted, a special record is written 
on the data file to reflect this situation. This process is accomplished by invoking sade with no frequency argu- 
ments within /ete/re when going to multiuser state: 

su adm —c "/usr/lib/sa/sade /usr/adm/sa/sa'date +%d' " 
Cron(1M) also controls the invocation of sar to generate the daily report via shell procedure sa2. One may 
choose the time period the daily report is to cover and the groups of system activity to be reported. For instance, 
if: 

0 20 * * 1-5 su sys ~e "/usr/lib/sa/sa2 —s 8:00 —e 18:00 —i 3600 —uybd " 
is an entry in /usr/lib/crontab, cron will execute the sar command to generate daily reports from the daily 
data file at 20:00 on weekdays. The daily report reports the CPU utilization, terminal device activity, buffer us- 


age, and device activity every hour from 8:00 to 18:00. 


In case of a shortage of the disk space or for any other reason, these data files and report files can he re- 
moved by the superuser. The manual entry sar(8) describes the daily report generation procedure. 


Page 181 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


ATTACHMENT 11.1 


The source files and shell programs of the system activity package are in directory /usr/srce/cmd/sa. 


sa.h 


sade.c 


sar.c 


saghdr.h 


saga.c & sagb.c 


sal.sh 


sa2.sh 


timex.c 


sadp.c 


Page 182 


The system activity header file defines the structure of data file and device information 
for measured devices. It is included in sade.c, sar.c, and timex.c. 


The data collection program that accesses /dev/kmem to read the system activity counters 
and writes data either on standard output or on a binary data file. It is invoked by the sar 
command generating a real-time report. It is also invoked indirectly by entries in /usr/lib/ 
crontab to collect system activity data. 


The report generation program invokes sade to examine system activity data, generates 
reports in real-time, and saves the data to a file for later usage. It may also generate sys- 
tem activity reports from an existing data file. It is invoked indirectly by cron to generate 
daily reports. 


The header file for saga.c and sagb.c. It contains data structures and variables used by 
saga.c and sagb.c. 


The graph generation program that first invokes sar to format the data of a data file in 
a tabular form and then displays the sar data in graphical form. 


The shell procedure that invokes sade to write data file records. It is activated by entries 
in /usr/lib/crontab. 


The shell procedure that invokes sar to generate the report. It also removes the daily data 
files and daily report files after a week. It is activated by an entry in /usr/lib/crontab on 
weekdays. 


The program that times a command and generates a system activity report. 


The program that samples and reports disk activities. 


6/82 


ISSUE 1 


ATTACHMENT 11.2 


struct sysinfo { 


time_t cpu[4]; 
#define CPU_IDLE 
#define CPU_USER 1 
#define CPU_KERNAL 2 
#define CPU_WAIT 3 
time_t wait|3]; 
#define W_IO 0 
#define W_SWAP 1 
#define W_PIO 2 
long bread; 
long bwrite; 
long lread; 
long lwrite; 
long phread; 
long phwrite; 
long swapin; 
long swapout; 
long bswapin; 
long bswapout; 
long pswitch; 
long syscall; 
long sysread; 
long syswrite; 
long sysfork; 
long sysexec; 
long runque; 
long runocc; 
long swpque; 
long SWPOCC; 
long iget; 
long namei; 
long dirblk; 
long readch; 
long writech; 
long revint; 
long xmtint; 
long mdmint; 
long rawch; 
long canch; 
long outch; 
long msg; 
long sema; 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE 


Page 183 


ADMINISTRATOR’S GUIDE ISSUE 1 6/82 


ATTACHMENT 11.3 


The derivation of the reported items is given in this attachment. Each item discussed below is the data dif- 
ference sampled at two distinct times t2 and t1. 


CPU Utilization & 


% -of-cpu-x = cpu-x / (cpu-idle + epu-user + cpu-kernel + epu-wait) * 100 


where cpu-x is cpu-idle, epu-user, epu-kernel (epu-sys), or cpu-wait. 
Cached Hit Ratio 
% -of-cached-I/O = (logical-I/O — block-I/O) / logical-I/O * 100 & 
where cached I/O is cached read or cached write. 
Disk or Tape I/O Activity 
% -of-busy = 1/O-active / (t2 — t1) * 100; 
avg-queue-length = I/O-resp / I/O-active; 
avg-wait = (I/O-resp — I/O-active) / I/O-ops; 
avg-service-time = I/Q-active / I/O-ops. 


Queve Activity 


avg-x-queue-length = x-queue / x-queue-occupied-time; 
% -of-x-queue-occupied-time = x-queue-occupied-time / (t2 — t1); 


where x-queue is run queue or swap queue. 
The Rest of System Activity 
avg-rate-of-x = x / (t2 — tl) 
where x is swap in/out, blks swapped in/out, terminal device activities, read/write characters, block read/write, 


logical read/write, process switch, system calls, read/write, fork/exec, iget, namei, directory blocks read, disk/ 
tape I/O activities, message or semaphore activities. 


Page 184 


